
Abstract

Bacillus thuringiensis is a major source of insecticidal genes imparting insect resistance in transgenic plants. Level of expression of transgenes in transgenic plants is important to achieve desirable level of resistance against target insects. In order to achieve desirable level of expression, rice chloroplast transit peptide sequence was fused with synthetic cry2AX1 gene to target its protein in chloroplasts. Sixteen PCR positive lines of rice were generated by Agrobacterium mediated transformation using immature embryos. Southern blot hybridization analysis of T0 transgenic plants confirmed the integration of cry2AX1 gene in two to five locations of rice genome and ELISA demonstrated its expression. Concentration of Cry2AX1 in transgenic rice events ranged 5.0–120 ng/g of fresh leaf tissue. Insect bioassay of T0 transgenic rice plants against neonate larvae of rice leaffolder showed larval mortality ranging between 20 and 80 % in comparison to control plant. Stable inheritance and expression of cry2AX1 gene was demonstrated in T1 progenies through Southern and ELISA. In T1 progenies, the highest concentration of Cry2AX1 and mortality of rice leaffolder larvae were recorded as 150 ng/g of fresh leaf tissue and 80 %, respectively. The Cry2AX1 expression even at a very low concentration (120–150 ng/g) in transgenic rice plants was found effective against rice leaffolder larvae.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0315-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Globally, more than 3 billion people depend on rice (Oryza sativa, L.) as their staple food, and by 2050 about 30 % more rice must be produced to meet the needs of the growing population (Brookes and Barfoot 2003). One of the major constraints in rice production, throughout the rice growing countries of the world, is the menace of insect pests. Among them the lepidopteran insects, such as yellow stem borer (YSB) (Scirphophaga incertulus Walker), striped stem borer (SSB) (Chilo supressalis Walker) and rice leaffolder (RLF) (Cnaphalocrosis medinalis Guenee) are the major ones, causing significant yield losses up to 10 and 30 % on an average, respectively, each year (Krishnaiah and Varma 2012). The uses of chemical insecticides against the boring insects have not found much effective as the insecticides cannot reach them (Deka and Barthakur 2010). Chemical control besides increasing the cost of production also causes deleterious effects to the ecosystem. The development of insect-resistant lines in rice through conventional breeding has been a challenge due to non-availability of resistance source in germplasm collection (Bhattacharya et al. 2006). Thus, an alternative and the most attractive strategy is to employ the tools of genetic engineering to produce insecticidal proteins by introducing heterologus insecticidal genes.

Insecticidal crystal protein gene (cry gene) of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is effective against important crop pests and widely used in plant genetic engineering. Bt mediated insect-resistant crop technology is the most successful application of agricultural biotechnology in today’s agriculture. Several crops such as tomato, cotton, maize and rice have been successfully transformed with different versions of crystal protein gene of Bt (Mandaokar et al. 2000; Sakthi et al. 2015; Jansen et al. 1997; Chen et al. 2005). The first transgenic rice plant with insect-resistant Bt protein (Cry1Ab) was reported by Fujimoto et al.. Thereafter, several rice varieties have been transformed with genes encoding various Cry1A type Bt crystal proteins and have been shown to be resistant to one or more lepidopteran insect pests of rice (Nayak et al. 1997; Ye et al. 2003; Kim et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2014). First field trial of Bt rice was conducted in China in 1998 (Shu et al. 2000) and in 2009 China’s Ministry of Agriculture issued biosafety certificates for limited commercialization trial in Hubei Province in China for a 5-year period, 2009–2014 (Chen et al. 2011).

The large-scale deployment of transgenic crops expressing a single Bt toxin may lead to break-down of resistance in the field. To delay the resistance breakdown, the concept of gene pyramiding is advocated as one of the resistance management strategies. The cry2A genes are appropriate candidate for pyramiding with cry1A type gene due to variation in their structure and function. Use of synthetic genes expressing hybrid Bt toxins with increased potency is a promising strategy in genetic engineering.

A chimeric Bt gene, cry2AX1 with part of sequence from cry2Aa and cry2Ac was developed in our laboratory to improve the insecticidal activity against a lepidopteran pest, Helicoverpa armigera. The chimeric Cry2AX1 protein exhibited higher level of toxicity than their parental proteins, Cry2Aa and Cry2Ac (Udayasuriyan et al. 2010). The Cry2AX1 protein isolated from recombinant Bt strain was also found to be effective against rice leaffolder. This chimeric gene was codon optimized to improve expression in crop plant (NCBI Accession Number GQ332539.1).

Another concern to be addressed while expressing Bt genes is optimal level of expression for desirable level of protection of crop plants against the target insect pest. One of the promising approaches is to target proteins to specific subcellular sites/compartments of plant cells, such as the chloroplast (Staub et al. 2000). Previously, Jang et al. reported that the targeting of foreign gene products to plastids using the transit peptide sequence increased the protein product levels in transgenic rice plants.

In the present study, we developed transgenic rice plants with codon optimized synthetic cry2AX1 gene (fused with rice chloroplast transit peptide sequence) using Agrobacterium mediated transformation. The insect bioassay results indicated that the transgenic plants expressing synthetic cry2AX1 gene were resistant to rice leaffolder.


