
Abstract

The strain VUK-A was isolated from a sediment sample of the Coringa mangrove ecosystem was identified as Streptomyces cheonanensis based on morphological, physiological, biochemical and molecular properties. Chemical investigation of the secondary metabolites of the strain Streptomyces cheonanensis VUK-A has led to the segregation of two bioactive compounds, namely 2-Methyl butyl propyl phthalate and Diethyl phthalate using column chromatography. The chemical structure of the active compounds was established on the basis of spectroscopic analysis, including 1H NMR and 13C NMR spectroscopies, FTIR and EIMS. The antimicrobial activity of the bioactive compounds produced by the strain was tested against a wide variety of bacteria and fungi and expressed in terms of minimum inhibitory concentration. The compounds (1&2) were active against all the bacteria tested, and the best activity of compound 1 was recorded against Proteus vulgaris (4 µg/ml). Compounds (1&2) were active against dermatophytes and fungi but compound 1 displayed high antifungal activity against Candida albicans (8 µg/ml) and Fusarium solani (16 µg/ml) compared to standard antifungal agents. The cytotoxicity of the bioactive compound 1 was tested against MDA-MB-231, OAW-42, HeLa, and MCF-7 cell lines. The highest activity of 100 µM by compound 1 was recorded against HeLa cancer cell lines. In fact, this is the first report of 2-Methyl butyl propyl phthalate from the genus Streptomyces.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0398-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.





Discussion

During the course of our screening programme for bioactive secondary metabolites from Coringa mangrove ecosystem, Streptomyces cheonanensis VUK-A exhibited significant bioactivity. A novel 2-Methyl butyl propyl phthalate along with a known compound Diethyl phthalate, was isolated from the fermentation broth of the strain grown on lactose-peptone broth. Phthalate compounds are petrochemicals used as plasticizers or solvents in a variety of industrial products and also used in food handling and storage while some of them are considered to be ubiquitous pollutants, with slight endocrine disrupting properties (Cespedes et al. 2004). Phthalate derivatives which are biologically active compounds are also effective against demodicidosis and also drug channeling agents (Makhija and Vavia 2003; Marchetti et al. 2002). Many phthalate derivatives have been isolated from plants, terrestrial and marine microorganisms, fungal and bacterial culture broths, especially from the genus Streptomyces (Sastry and Rao 1995; El-Naggar 1997; Chen 2004; Roy et al. 2006). The isolation of compound 2 was previously reported as a natural product from Streptomyces sp.1010, isolated from shallow sea sediment from the region of Livingston Island, Antarctica (Ivanova et al. 2001) and Helicobacter pylori (Keire et al. 2001). It has been reported that complexes derived from diethyl phthalate have antifungal activity (Raman and Parameswari 2007). Many phthalate derivatives such as bis-(2-ethyl hexyl) phthalate, bis-(5-ethyl heptyl) phthalate and dibutyl phthalates were reported from Streptomyces sp.TN 256 strain, Streptomyces bangladeshiensis and Nocardia levis exhibited several antimicrobial activities (Smaoui et al. 2012; Kavitha et al. 2009). However this is the first report of compound 2-Methyl butyl propyl phthalate, from the genus Streptomyces, and no information is available on the isolation and characterization of 2-Methyl butyl propyl phthalate from microorganisms, particularly actinomycetes.

Our results showed that compound 1 has a good potential inhibitor against P. vulgaris (responsible for human urinary tract infections) (4 μg/ml), S. aureus (causes impetigo, carbuncles and abscesses) (8 μg/ml), Candida albicans (causes oral thrush and vaginal infection) (8 μg/ml) and F. solani (responsible for fusarium wilt, fungal keratitis and onychomycosis) (16 μg/ml). Compound 2 showed to have antimicrobial activity against S. epidermis (an opportunistic human pathogen responsible for nosocomial infections) (16 μg/ml), E. coli (causes cholecystitis, bacteremia, cholangitis and urinary tract infection) (32 μg/ml), C. albicans (32 μg/ml) and Aspergillus flavus (responsible for pulmonary aspergillosis, production of significant quantities of aflatoxin which is acutely toxic and carcinogenic) with an MIC of 32 μg/ml.

The potential of compound 1 was investigated to inhibit cancer cell growth in MDA-MB-231, HeLa, OAW-42 and MCF-7 cell lines. The compound showed good inhibitory potentiality against supra said cell lines, with remarkable display of activity against HeLa (100 µM). In addition, anti cancer activity of compound 1 against above said cell lines are reported here for the first time. The results of the present study showed that the compound exhibit potent anti cancer activities in impressive low concentrations.
