
Abstract

In present report effects of explants type, basal media and plant growth regulators (PGRs) were tested for induction of indirect somatic embryogenesis in medicinally important plant Silybum marianum L. Leaf, petiole and root explants were exploited in vitro on B5 (Gamborg), SH (Schenk and Hildebrandt) and MS (Murashige and Skoog) media for induction of embryogenic callus followed by somatic embryogenesis. Highest callus induction frequency (76 ± 4.8 %) was recorded when petiole explants of in vitro derived plantlets were cultured on B5 medium supplemented with 1.5 mg l−1 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4_D) in combination with 1.5 mg l−1 Thidiazuron (TDZ). Induction and multiplication of somatic embryos were observed, when the embryogenic calluses were sub-cultured on to B5 medium containing 0.5 mg l−1 2,4-D plus 1.5 mg l−1 TDZ. At this PGRs treatment, 77 % of the cultures responded with 39.1 somatic embryos per callus. Furthermore, MS0 medium was indicated more reponsive for growth and maturation of somatic embryos. Analysis of biochemical markers during various growth phases in somatic embryogenesis revealed that somatic embryos exhibited highest level of total carbohydrate, starch, ascorbic acid and total free amino acids. However, higher protein levels were detected in non-embryogenic callus. Nevertheless, considerable amount of silymarin (4.1 mg g−1 DW) was detected in somatic embryos than other growth phases. Thus, the present study concluded that biochemical and physiological changes during embryogenesis are influenced by interplay of explants type, basal media and PGRs.



Introduction

Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn. (Milk thistle) of Asteracea family is valued for its bioactive compound called silymarin and has been used globally for the treatment of hepatic disorders for centuries (Khan et al. 2013). Silymarin consists of the isomers of different flavanolignans, having health promoting activities such as anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-hepatitis, anti-bacterial and anti-viral (Abbasi et al. 2010). The exhibiting higher variability in the phytochemical contents in wild grown medicinal plants is the major bottleneck in pharmaceutical preparations for production of effective herbal medicines (Khan et al. 2015a). Similarly, the wild grown Silybum plants possess the problems of low efficacy in silymarin due to geographic variability, contamination, herbal adulteration and lack of uniform procedures for cultivation and sustainable harvest (Haban et al. 2009). However, development of elite varieties with predictable phytochemical profiles towards plant tissue culture application might probably circumvent these issues of variability in Silybum end products (Khan et al. 2014). Clonal plant production in vitro has potential to ensure vigorous growth of pharmacologically superior plants, and thus significantly reduce contamination of plants, and facilitate biochemical characterization supported by chromatographic fingerprint analysis for quality control (Murch et al. 2006). The biotechnological interventions for establishment of a feasible system of somatic embryogenesis may produce uniform plants rapidly and easily (Moon et al. 2013). The process of differentiation is a consequence of some biochemical and physiological changes induced by plant growth regulators; therefore evaluation of biochemical parameters in different growth phases during somatic embryogenesis could be used as markers for monitoring different events taking place during the process of somatic embryogenesis (Jeyaseelan and Rao 2005).

The present study aimed to establish a feasible method for somatic embryogenesis using different explants, basal media containing various combinations and concentrations of PGRs; furthermore, to evaluate the levels of carbohydrates, proteins, amino acids, phenolic compounds and silymarin content in different growth phases during somatic embryogenesis of S. marianum.


