
Abstract

Mycotoxins are unavoidable contaminants of food grains, feeds, medicinal herbs, and spices, posing as health threat to animals and humans. The objective of this study was to screen medicinal herbs and spices for fungi and mycotoxin contamination and evaluate their safety. Sixty-three samples were examined for fungal contamination and fungal load determined using standard microbiological method. Aflatoxin and citrinin were detected using thin layer chromatography and high-performance chromatography technique. Fifty-eight out of the 63 samples were contaminated, while five were free from fungal contamination. Analysis revealed that 47 % of the samples had a fungal load above 1 × 103 cfu/g which is the permissible limit set by World Health Organization. The samples Mesua ferrea-II and Terminalia chebula-III had the highest fungal load, i.e., 5.0 × 104 cfu/g. A total of 187 fungi were isolated, out of which 28 were toxigenic which included 19 aflatoxin-producing Aspergillus flavus and 9 citrinin-producing Penicillium citrinum. The natural contamination with aflatoxin B1 was detected only in one sample, i.e., Arachis hypogaea (groundnut) which was present beyond the permissible limit. Though toxigenic fungi were isolated, mycotoxins were not detected from any of the medicinal herbs and spices. Medicinal herbs and spices are susceptible to toxigenic fungi; however, they also possess intrinsic factors that inhibit mycotoxin contamination. This study provides a basis in assessing the degree of fungal and potential mycotoxin contamination in medicinal herbs and spices.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0476-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Mycotoxins which literally mean “fungus poison” are secondary metabolites produced by saprophytic fungi, such as Aspergillus flavus, A. ochraceus, Fusarium moniliforme, F. graminearum, Penicillium citrinum, P. expansum, etc. The important mycotoxins causing significant health hazards are aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, citrinin, Fusarium toxins, patulin, and zearalenone. They are toxic to both animal species and humans and are reported to be carcinogenic, hepatotoxic, nephrotoxic, cytotoxic, mutagenic, and immuno-suppressive (Hussain and Brasel 2001).

Mycotoxins occur as natural and unavoidable contaminants on a variety of food commodities posing as potential health hazard. The occurrence of fungi and mycotoxins in medicinal herbs has been reported from around the world. Studies in India showed the natural occurrence of aflatoxin B1, citrinin, ochratoxin A, and zearalenone in medicinal plants and herbal drugs, such as Asparagus racemosus, Cinnamomum zeylanicum, Elettaria cardomomum, Piper nigrum, Zingiber officinale, etc. (Roy et al. 1988; Chourasia 1995; Thirumala-Devi et al. 2001). The incidence of toxigenic fungi producing aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, and fumonisin on medicinal herbs was reported from Argentina (Rizzo et al. 2004). An investigation from South Africa showed the presence of fumonisin B1 in dietary and medicinal wild plants (Sewram et al. 2006). Bugno et al. had reported the occurrence of aflatoxins-, ochratoxin A-, and citrinin- producing Aspergillus and Penicillium in medicinal herbs in Brazil. In Saudi Arabia, the presence of aflatoxin B1 (12–40 µg/kg) in Pimpenella anisum, P. nigrum, Mentha piperita, and Origamun majorana was reported (Bokhari 2007). A survey in Korea on spices and processed spice products for aflatoxin contamination showed the presence of aflatoxins at 0.08–4.66 µg/kg level in samples of red pepper and ginger products (Cho et al. 2008). Multicontamination of mycotoxins with T-2 toxin, zearalenone, aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, deoxynivalenol, citrinin, and fumonisin were detected in 84 medicinal herbs surveyed in Spain (Santos et al. 2009).

In India, the medicinal properties of plants have been greatly exploited in Ayurveda which is one of the traditional systems of Indian medicine. Herbs are used as dietary and health supplements and the demand for medicinal herbs as an alternative medicine has increased over the last few years. These herbs are often prone to fungal and mycotoxin contamination; the efficacy and safety of medicinal herbs are questionable, and the detailed reports on the same are still scarce (Calixto 2000; Trucksess and Scott 2008). The consumption of medicinal herbs contaminated with mycotoxins may cause ill effects rather than improving the well-being of an individual.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the safety of medicinal herbs and spices by screening for fungal and mycotoxin contamination. In addition, the fungal load in the samples was determined, and toxigenic fungi were identified.



Discussion

Mycotoxins have been identified as important toxins affecting animal species and humans ever since the discovery of aflatoxin B1 in 1960. Mycotoxigenic fungi are ubiquitous in nature and are held responsible for economic loss by decreasing the crop yield and quality of food. The presence of fungi and their mycotoxins are reported not only in food grains but also in medicinal herbs and processed foods. In this study, medicinal herbs and spices were screened for the presence of fungi and mycotoxin. Among the various fungal isolates, Aspergillus and Penicillium were the predominant fungi isolated which corresponded with previous reports. Species of Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Fusarium are the major producers of mycotoxins, and hence, there occurrence in the samples is of high significance. Efuntoye had also reported that species of the genera Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Fusarium were the most abundant fungi present in medicinal herbs. Examination of 84 medicinal plants and spices revealed A. flavus, A. parasiticus, F. oxysporum, and P. viridicatum as the most commonly occurring contaminant (Aziz et al. 1998). Other genera, such as Fusarium, Mucor and Trichoderma, were also reported as dominant fungi present in medicinal plants and herbal drugs (Efuntoye 1996; Martins et al. 2001). Aspergillus niger has been reported as a frequent contaminant in medicinal plants (Efuntoye 1996; Abou-Arab et al. 1999; Bugno et al. 2006). The presence of A. niger on the herbs may or may not cause any ill effects.

Although Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Fusarium are the major producers of mycotoxins, not all species are toxigenic. As seen from this study, though all the samples of Phyllanthus emblica were contaminated with several species of Aspergillus, Cladosporium, and Penicillium, none of the isolates were found toxigenic. It was reported that only 21.9 % of Aspergillus and Penicillium isolates from herbal drugs were producers of aflatoxins, ochratoxin A, and citrinin (Bugno et al. 2006). Similarly, Aziz et al. had reported that 37 % of Aspergillus isolates from medicinal plants and spices were aflatoxin producers.

Groundnuts are known to be commonly contaminated with aflatoxin B1, and in this study, a high amount of aflatoxin B1 on groundnut sample was detected. It is interesting to note that none of the medicinal herbs and spices was positive for the toxins analyzed. The samples from which toxigenic fungi were isolated also tested negative for natural mycotoxin contamination. An earlier investigation by Abou-Arab et al. reported the occurrence of Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Fusarium species in medicinal plants; however, natural mycotoxin contamination was absent in all the samples. Another investigator reported the presence of aflatoxins in spices but interestingly not in aromatic herb, herb-tea, and medicinal plant samples (Romagnoli et al. 2007). In conformity with the findings of earlier investigators, this study also suggests that the presence of toxigenic fungi does not mean mycotoxin contamination in herbs.

Though several toxigenic strains were isolated from the samples, the herb itself may not be a good substrate for toxin production. Many fungal strains which produce toxins in synthetic medium were unable to produce toxins in medicinal plants. The absence of mycotoxins as a natural contaminant in samples may be due to intrinsic characteristics of herbs such as essential oils which inhibit the toxin production (Al-Rahmah et al. 2011; Prakash et al. 2011). The herb Withania somnifera has been reported to possess the ability to inhibit aflatoxin B1 synthesis (Krishnamurthy and Shashikala 2006). In addition, in this study, aflatoxin-producing Aspergillus flavus was isolated from this herb; however, aflatoxin B1 itself was not detected. The antioxidant property of several plants, especially herbs and spices, is detrimental to secondary metabolism and, hence, has the natural potential for inhibiting mycotoxin. It has been demonstrated that the presence of active oxygen is favorable for aflatoxin B1 production by Narasaiah et al.. Hence, the antioxidants of several plants have been extensively studied as anti-fungal and anti-mycotoxin agents (Gulcin et al. 2012; Mahoney et al. 2010). The powder and essential oil of Cymbopogon citratus have been shown to inhibit aflatoxin B1 and also preserve the quality of melon seed under storage (Bankole and Joda 2004). The essential oils of Cinnamomum jensenianum (Tian et al. 2011), Ocimum sanctum (Kumar et al. 2010), and Zataria multiflora (Gandomi et al. 2009) were efficiently used against toxigenic fungi and aflatoxin B1, and their safe use as natural preservative of food has been implicated. The use of whole spices, such as Syzygium aromaticum and Cinnamomum verum, has been shown to inhibit the growth of A. flavus and P. citrinum and their toxins in culture media and rice grains (Aiko and Mehta 2013a, b). These reports corroborated with the observations of the present study in which the absence of mycotoxin could be attributed to the inhibitory property of the herbs and spices.

As the environmental conditions are conducive for the fungal growth in tropical region, most of the samples investigated in this study were heavily contaminated with toxigenic as well as non-toxigenic fungi. The sample Asparagus racemosus collected from the herbal farm showed heavy contamination, while the same sample in packed form was less contaminated. Thus, suggesting that proper cleaning and packaging is effective in reducing the fungal contamination. However, several other herbal drugs that were packed and sold in the market, such as Nimbapatradi churnam, Harre badi, Safed museli, Herbal drug-1, and Herbal drug-4, had high fungal load, and toxigenic fungi were present in each of them. Though mycotoxin was not detected from these herbs, the presence of toxigenic fungi poses a risk of mycotoxin contamination and, thereby, subject humans to potential health threats.
