
Abstract

The present work demonstrates the participation of polyamines (PAs) to improve direct regeneration and Agrobacterium-mediated transformation in soybean half-seeds. The inclusion of PAs to culture medium along with optimal plant growth regulators (PGRs) enhanced shoot induction [98.3 %; 4.44 µM N6-benzyladenine (BA) and 103.27 µM spermidine] and elongation [90.0 %; 1.45 µM gibberellic acid (GA3) and 49.42 µM spermine]. The polyamine putrescine (62.08 µM) alone greatly enriched root induction (96.3 %). The influence of PAs on transformed plant production was assessed by comparing optimized protocol (comprising PAs and PGRs) with a regeneration system involving only PGRs. Plant transformation was performed in half-seeds of cultivar DS 97–12 using strain EHA105 harboring pCAMBIA1301. Transgene expression and integration was confirmed by GUS staining, PCR, and Southern hybridization. The transformed explants/materials successively cultured on co-cultivation (BA and spermidine), shoot induction (BA and spermidine), shoot elongation (GA3 and spermine), and rooting medium (putrescine) showed enhanced transformation efficiency (29.3 %) compared with its counterparts (14.6 %) with respective PGR alone [BA, GA3, or indole-3-butyric acid (IBA)]. Overall findings of the study suggest that involvement of PAs improved T-DNA transfer during co-cultivation, and delivered most suitable condition for efficient regeneration/survival, which led to enhanced transformation efficiency in soybean.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0448-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merrill] is considered to be one of the most economically important crops because of its rich protein (40 %), oil (20 %), and carbohydrate (12 %) content. Soybean seeds also possess isoflavones, omega-3 fatty acids, phytic acid, tocopherols, phenolic compounds, saponins, and minerals. To date, many laboratories put a great deal of effort to improve soybean by genetic manipulation with value added agronomical and nutritional traits. Though tissue culture and genetic transformation techniques have been well established for agriculturally important dicotyledonous species, these techniques could not be efficiently applied for soybean (Ma and Wu 2008). For genetic improvement of soybean through biotechnological applications, an efficient plant regeneration protocol is a pre-requisite. Recently, half-seed explants of soybean are gaining importance toward in vitro regeneration (Radhakrishnan and Ranjitha kumari 2007; Ether et al. 2013; Janani and Ranjitha Kumari 2013) and Agrobacterium-mediated genetic transformation (Paz et al. 2006; Zia et al. 2010b). Half-seed explants possess advantages like availability within a short time (maximum 1 day) which reduces the total regeneration period, and the starting material for experiment can be obtained immediately on demand, since imbibed seeds are its source.

We previously demonstrated the positive influence and synergistic effect of polyamines (PAs) in combination with different plant growth regulators (PGRs) on shoot regeneration from cotyledonary nodes of soybean (Arun et al. 2014). The PAs are considered as a new class of PGRs and hormonal second messengers, and as one of the reserves of carbon and nitrogen at least in cultured tissues (Kakkar et al. 2000). The PAs are known to stimulate embryogenesis in Panax ginseng (Kevers et al. 2000), shoot regeneration in Chinese radish (Pua et al. 1996), Korean radish (Curtis et al. 2004), and Capsicum frutescens (Kumar et al. 2007). Even though the role of PAs on promoting plant morphogenesis has been reported in several crops, only a few attempts (in wheat, tobacco, and apricot) were made to study its involvement on improving Agrobacterium-mediated genetic transformation (Khanna and Daggard 2003; Kumar and Rajam 2005; Petri et al. 2005). Furthermore, to date, no report is available in soybean with respect to PAs on improving T-DNA delivery and transformation efficiency.

Increasing meristematic cells in explants, enhancing T-DNA delivery to target cells, improving explant regeneration frequency, and reducing difficulties on plant regeneration/survival by PAs could contribute to attain higher transformation efficiency in any genotype. Hence, the present investigation was designed to optimize an efficient regeneration system for half-seeds of soybean using different PGRs and PAs, and evaluate the influence of PAs on transformed plant production by comparing optimized protocol (comprising PAs and PGRs) with a regeneration system involving only PGRs.


