
Abstract

The purpose of present study was to optimize polyhydroxyalkanotes (PHAs) production in a gamma ray mutant strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa grown on soybean oil in minimal salts media under shake flask conditions. The production kinetics was studied by sampling on daily basis for 6 days to investigate the best conditions for PHAs production like biomass estimation, carbon source utilization and PHAs yield. The PHA accumulation was observed up to 50.27 % (w/w) of cell dry mass. The Pseudomonas species synthesized medium chain length PHA copolyester as per identified by LCMS and confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy. The ESI–MS analysis exhibited the major polyhydroxybutyrate with a molecular mass of m/z 448.5.



Introduction

Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are one of the major candidates to replace petroleum derived polyesters due to their extraordinary properties and they have one of the widest range of molecular masses from 1 × 104 to 1 × 106 amu (Chen 2010). These are high molecular mass biological polyesters synthesized in many living organisms. The properties of PHAs cover wide range from materials like poly (propylene) to elastomeric materials. Their diverse properties are either due to the distant variation between ester linkages or the length of pendant groups extending from back bone (Williams et al. 1999). Properties of conventional plastics as well as PHAs can be tailored as desired from packing materials to highly elastic ones like coatings but the PHAs have the edge of being bio-degradable as well as they are produced from the sources which are renewable (Loo and Sudesh 2007).

Plants and different types of microorganisms can produce PHAs but cell dry mass (CDM) of less than 10 % (w/w) is observed in plants, however bacteria can accumulate as high as 90 % (w/w). This low accumulation in plants is due to the fact that greater than 10 % (w/w) accumulation generally has a negative impact on plant growth (Verlinden et al. 2007; Tan et al. 2014). On the other hand, more than 250 different bacterial strains can produce PHAs under various conditions and they generate PHAs with different levels of quality, yield and efficiency (Pollet and Averous 2011).

Conventional plastics produced from petrochemical sources are associated with the main issues of disposal and production from limited resources of petrochemicals resulting in the accumulation of large waste in the environment (landfill and sea water). Occurrence of PHAs was reported by Lemoigne in 1920s but the main reason of preferring conventional petrochemical based plastics over bioplastics was the low cost of formers and high cost of latters (Verlinden et al. 2007). One of the major factors for high cost of PHAs is the high cost of carbon source the researchers, therefore, are trying to explore some inexpensive sources like waste frying oils to reduce the cost associated with PHAs production (Lee et al. 2008). Pseudomonas sp. has been reported to produce 37.34 and 23.52 % (w/w) PHAs from corn oil and waste frying oils, respectively (Song et al. 2008).

Agriculture and food industries dispose off a large amount of carbon and other nutrients rich waste which can be used for the economical production of PHAs as this waste can be utilized as renewable source by many microorganisms hence giving more ecological and attractive alternative usage than disposal of this waste into the environment (Song et al. 2008; Chee et al. 2010; Prasad and Sethi 2013). Plant oils (like palm oil, soybean oil, sunflower oil etc.) are preferred to sugars as sole carbon source for PHAs production as they are cheaper and produce more quantity of PHAs per gram of carbon source, for instance, 0.3–0.4 g of PHAs have been reported by 1 g of glucose; on the other hand, plant oils yield 0.6–0.8 g of PHAs per gram of oil. This higher production could be attributed to the more carbon content per unit mass of plant oils as compared to sugars (Chee et al. 2010). The higher catabolism rate of lipid substrates (beta-oxidation at lipids) than other substrates (Muhr et al. 2013a, b) and the fact that these saturated and unsaturated fats can easily be metabolized by microorganisms to synthesize PHAs (Koller et al. 2012).

For the batch production of PHAs in bacterial cells, two modes are normally used. In the first, accumulation of PHAs starts at the exponential phase and continues until the late stationary phase and is known as one stage batch cultivation. In the second, cultivation of bacteria is done in a separate growth favoring environment and when the cells are enriched, they are transferred to the PHAs accumulation phase where nutrient depletion is used for this purpose (Kumar and Abe 2010). For the survival of cells when bacteria face starvation, fluctuations in environmental conditions, giving response to sporulation or encystment, bacteria store important nutrients where PHAs are one of the major such storage compounds (Haba et al. 2007).

For the production of PHAs within bacterial cells, the carbon sources are comprehended and then transmuted into hydroxyalkanoates followed by polymerization into PHAs and stored in cell cytoplasm as water insoluble granules. These granules appear as spherical particles with clear boundaries and are electron transparent. These PHAs in granules form are kept in amorphous state in vivo otherwise if crystallized these granules cannot serve as storage compound for the host bacterial cell producing it (Loo and Sudesh 2007). Pseudomonas sp. is one of the most studied microorganism for PHAs accumulation (Jiang et al. 2008). P. aeruginosa generally produce medium chain length (mcl) PHAs (Soberon-Chavez et al. 2005a). Various studies on Pseudomonas species showed that different carbon sources like alkanes, alkene, carboxylic acids, alcohols, carbohydrates and others could be used for mcl PHAs production (Silva-Queiroz et al. 2009). P. aeruginosa could produce PHAs and rhamnolipids simultaneously when subjected to nitrogen limited conditions (Marsudi et al. 2008).

The EBN-8 gamma ray mutant of P. aeruginosa has previously been studied for enhanced production of biosurfactant (Raza et al. 2014) but has not been studied for the production of PHAs when grown on soybean oil. The aim of present study is to investigate production kinetics of PHAs by using a Pseudomonas aeruginosa mutant strain grown on soybean oil as carbon source under shake flask conditions. The synthesized polymer was isolated, purified and chemically analyzed for identification.


