
Abstract

The suppression subtractive hybridization was employed to elucidate the resistance mechanism in Brassica oleracea var. capitata upon infection with Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. A cDNA library was constructed enriched in differentially expressed transcripts in the resistant cultivar Pusa mukta. A total of 150 unigenes were classified into five functional categories. The present study indicates that the defense-related unigenes accounted for the 35 % of the total unigenes studied. Confirmation of defense-specific representation genes through semiquantitative RT-PCR revealed their increased expression in the resistant cultivar which was validated by qPCR. The resistant cultivar elicited a strong hypersensitive response upon attack by black rot pathogen. The study is first of its kind where the resistant cultivar Pusa mukta in India has been assessed for its resistance to the bacterial pathogen.



Introduction

Black rot, caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Pammel) Dowson is a major seed-borne biotic constraint for cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. capitata L.) production by all over the world which causes substantial crop loss especially during warm, humid seasons (Williams 1980). The pathogen enters the plant through the hydathodes and spreads in the vasculature of the leaf and stem. The typical symptom of black rot is the occurrence of V-shaped chlorotic lesions with vertices towards the mid rib of the leaves.

The development and use of black rot-resistant cultivars have long been recognized as important methods of controlling the disease. The inheritance of major gene resistance has been studied in the diploid B. rapa (A genome) and in the tetraploids B. carinata (BC genome) and B. napus (AC genome) (Guo et al. 1991; Ignatov et al. 2000). A single dominant race-specific gene has been mapped to the A genome in B. napus (Vicente et al. 2002), and QTLs that control resistance to at least two of the most prevalent races of X. campestris pv. campestris have been mapped in a Chinese cabbage accession of B. rapa (Soengas et al. 2007).

Durable resistance to black rot can be imparted by the genes present in the A and B genomes of Brassica. To achieve this aim, genes from the wild relative Arabidopsis thaliana could potentially be easier and quicker to characterize molecularly, and either be used directly in transgenic brassica crops, or facilitate the identification and interspecific transfer of homologous black rot resistance genes from A or B genome sources into vegetable crops. Interestingly, most A. thaliana accessions are resistant to one or more races of X. campestris pv. campestris, and more than half exhibit broad-spectrum resistance to all major races of the pathogen suggesting that this wild relative of brassica crops could indeed provide useful sources of durable black rot resistance (Holub 2007). A. thaliana and X. campestris pv. campestris provided one of the earliest experimental models for the investigation of the interactions of A. thaliana with a major crop pathogen, the molecular basis of natural variation in black rot resistance is largely unexplored in this pathosystem (Simpson and Johnson 1990).

Defense-related enzymes have a broad action spectrum activity and play key roles in plant–pathogen interactions. Peroxidase is one of the most important factors of the plant’s biochemical defense against pathogenic microorganisms, and is actively involved in the self-regulation of plant metabolism after infection. Peroxidase activity has been associated with pathogenesis, which in turn leads to reinforcement of cell walls with phenolic compounds. Progress in identifying defense mechanisms in cabbage has been very slow, and few defense-related genes in cabbage have been characterized. Functional genomics and proteomics studies in both resistant and susceptible host plants inoculated with X. campestris pv. campestris will provide key information on the interaction between the bacteria and the host. The control of black rot is still a worldwide threat and development of black rot-resistant cultivars is very essential as only few black rot-resistant cultivars are known worldwide (Vicente and Holoub 2013).

Suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) is a PCR-based method used to generate unbiased cDNAs library and amplifies only differentially expressed cDNAs. The target cDNA library called as the tester population is denatured, and hybridized to the driver cDNAs population present in the excess. Common fragments to both anneal to each other, whereas tester-specific products remain single stranded represent the differentially expressed genes. SSH is used to generate expressed sequence tags (EST).

The present study involves isolation of genes involved in the resistance to the black rot pathogen in cabbage. The suppression subtractive hybridization method (Diatchenko et al. 1996) was used to generate cDNA libraries enriched in sequences expressed in cabbage leaves during the early stages of hypersensitive response (HR). Several studies indicated that a large number of plant genes are transcriptionally regulated upon challenge by a pathogen, but that most of them may be common to both compatible and incompatible interactions (Maleck et al. 2000). For focusing on genes strictly involved in the hypersensitive response, cDNA from resistant cabbage cv. Pusa mukta plants infected with X. campestris pv. campestris (incompatible interaction) were subtracted with Pusa mukta (uninfected). Here we present a catalogue of cabbage non-redundant expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and we describe the identification of genes for which expression is regulated during the early events of X. campestris pv. campestris infection process. These defense genes provide an important genomic resource for understanding the interactions between cabbage and black rot pathogen. The resistance mechanism of a cabbage cultivar has been assessed for the first time in India at the molecular level.


