
Abstract

Biosurfactants produced by biofilm-forming bacteria have great applications in biotechnology, pharmaceutical, food engineering, bioremediation, and biohydrometallurgy industries. This study aimed to find out the bacteria that produce novel exopolymers (EPSs) which can find potential role in oil biodegradation. A screening procedure was performed to detect EPS-producing bacteria. The EPS producing isolate was identified as Acinetobacter species by 16S rDNA analysis. The polymer produced by the isolate has shown significant emulsification and surfactant activities, and the activities were compared to some of the commercial emulsifiers. The EPS has been partially characterized by FTIR analysis and has been proved to be a glycolipoprotein. This is one of the very few reports on Acinetobacter species producing EPS with surfactant properties.



Introduction

Biosurfactants are surface-active and structurally diverse group molecules that are synthesized by the microbial cells. Most of the surfactants being used are chemically synthesized. There is an observable increase in the interest among the scientists on microbial emulsifiers because of their potential applications in environmental protection, low toxicity, high biodegradability, and high foaming capacity. Bioemulsifiers get accumulated at the interphase between the two immiscible phases by which they can reduce the surface tension, thereby resulting in the increased solubility and emulsification of the immiscible phases. Bioemulsifiers can convert the insoluble substrate into soluble substrates which can be utilized by the microorganisms for their metabolism (Rodrigues et al. 2006). Biosurfactants with such surface properties stood as good examples for enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Some of the biosurfactants are very effective, and they can reduce the surface tension of water from 72 dynes/cm to value range of 25–30 dynes/cm (Satpute et al. 2010). Lipopeptides belong to a class of biosurfactants that have shown remarkable surface active properties, viz., surplus crude oil recovery, food processing, de-emulsification, antimicrobial, antitumor, antiviral, and anti adhesive activities (Bodour et al. 2004). Biosurfactants have been shown dispersant activity by reducing the surface tension of oil–water interface effectively. Many bacteria like Acinetobacter, Rhodococcus species, and Actinomycetes, and other biofilm forming bacteria have been reported to produce biosurfactants. However, there is only less abundance of biosurfactant producing microorganisms that can be grown in natural environments than in contaminated environments. Growth pattern and biofilm formation may depend on various development factors, such as surface area, smoothness, flow velocity, and nutrients (Donlan and Costerton 2002). Hence, this study aims to isolate and molecular characterize an emulsifier producing bacterium from marine source.


