


Introduction

Mosquitoes act as vector for many protozoans, bacterial and viral diseases (Service 1996). Increase in mosquito population is a perennial problem for many developing countries due to spread of diseases like malaria, filarial, encephalitis, etc. To protect humans against mosquito born diseases, mosquito repellents’ in different forms (herbs, aromatic oils and synthetic compounds) were widely used all over world. Of many available synthetic mosquito repellents, the best-known chemical insect repellent is N,N-diethyl-3-methyl benzamide (DEET) (Fradin and Day 2002). It will be more surprising to know that over 40 years of its discovery and usage, DEET gain remarkable safety profile (Fradin 1998) with highest biting inhibition rate (88.7–92.5 %) against wide range of mosquitoes. However, studies reveal that the use of synthetic mosquito repellents at faster pace could cause many side effects (slurred speech, muscle twisting, seizures, rashes, vomiting and nausea) and elevate issues concerning human health. To safeguard human health, use of safe natural compounds from plant extracts became an alternative approach to minimize the side effects as compared to synthetic mosquito repellents. Historically it is well known that plant extracts were extensively used as potential natural repellents against wide range of insects over 2000 years ago (Nentwing 2003). Moreover, many natural herbs have been evaluated for their flavouring characters and therapeutic properties (Singh et al. 2010). However, the newly discovered natural compounds from potential medicinal plants have not been fully explored due to their toxic characteristics (Metacalf 1962).

Studies confirm that plant extracts from Phytolacca dodencandra showed larvicidal activity against mosquitoes (Dahlman and Hibb 1967). Since ages, ancient people use herbal plants in different ways to repel mosquitoes. Widely used practices include generation of smoke by burning plants (Sharma and Ansari 1993), hanging fresh plants in houses (Waka et al. 2006) for avoiding mosquitoes in the near vicinity. In contrast to whole herbs, studies confirm that plant extracts form wide range of plants are more advantageous and efficacious. Among the plant families with promising essential oils used as repellents, Cymbopogon, Ocimum and Eucalyptus are the most cited. The prime objective of the present investigation is to explore the possibility of repellent activity of potential natural compounds from Ocimum species against odorant binding proteins of Anopheles gambiae. Attempts were made to understand molecular mechanisms underlying possible interactions of natural mosquito repellent compounds against odorant binding proteins (3Q8I and 3N7H) of A. gambiae. Further these studies will widen the scope to choose the most suitable compounds for design and development of effective and safe mosquito repellents.


