
Abstract

Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptococcus pneumoniae are usual cause of upper respiratory tract infection cases. The present study aims the isolation of bacterial strains which are resistant to the commonly prescribed antibiotics. In total, 900 throat swabs were obtained from the patients suffering from upper respiratory tract infections residing in three different localities. The maximum number of isolates (64 %) were obtained from locality-1 (L-1), whereas lowest isolates were found in second locality (L-2). H. influenzae was found to be the most dominant bacterial pathogen in upper respiratory tract infections in patients with 42 % of the total isolates. H. influenzae and Chlamydia pneumoniae were resistant to β-lactam antibiotics but susceptible to fluroquinolones and aminoglycosides, whereas S. aureus and S. pneumoniae were found to be highly resistant to β-lactam, aminoglycosides and fluroquinolones. S. aureus was also moderately resistant to fluroquinolones and aminoglycosides with percent resistance of 26, 33 and 18 %, respectively. 56 % S. pneumoniae isolates were resistant against erythromycin, 27 % against chloramphenicol and 23 % against cefuroxime. The studies revealed that S. aureus and S. pneumoniae strains were high producer of biofilms which could be one of the reasons for their high pathogenicity.



Introduction

Upper respiratory tract infections are one of the common diseases which can be found in the individuals of all age groups. Pharyngitis, nasopharyngitis, tonsillitis, otitis media and sinusitis are the major infections of upper respiratory tract. These major problems are generally caused by viruses (rhinovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus, human metapneumovirus, and influenza virus. After the viral invasion, the secondary infection is caused by various types of bacteria resulting in chronic obstructive lung disease and high fever. The different types of bacteria which are involved in upper respiratory tract infections (RTIs) are Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pyogenes, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptococcus pneumonia. Although the upper respiratory tract infection cases are not complicated, the acute swelling caused by these infections may threaten airway patency resulting in asthmatic condition or cause obstruction in the passage of ingestion which further leads to significant dehydration. The RTIs are more common in developing countries in which, after diarrhea, RTIs are the second cause of death in children due to pneumonia (Ndip et al. 2009). Each year, United States reports that mortality rate of ∼14 % (5.6 million cases) is directly associated with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) (Karchmer 2004).

Bacteria are becoming resistant to conventional antibiotics. Ten years ago, concern centered on Gram-positive bacteria, particularly methicillin-resistant S. aureus and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus spp (Kumarasamy et al. 2010). Now, however, large number of clinical microbiologists agree that multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria pose the greatest risk to public health (Ukpai et al. 2015). The increase in resistance of Gram-negative bacteria (faster than in Gram-positive bacteria) is higher than active new/developmental antibiotics, and only a few drug development programs are insufficient to provide therapeutic cover in next 10–20 years. The main reason for increase in resistance from antibiotics in bacteria is due to the mobile genes present on the plasmids which spread and transfer through bacterial populations (Bennett 2009). The overuse and misuse of antibiotics for the treatment of respiratory tract infection has been considered one of the major reasons for the emergence of resistance of bacteria against antibiotics (Gonzales et al. 1997). Another reason for antibiotic resistance of bacteria has been considered to be the production of biofilms during quorum-sensing-regulated mechanism which releases beta-lactamase responsible for degradation of various antibiotics (Wilke et al. 2005). It has been reported that S. pneumoniae were found to be resistant to penicillin and erythromycin, H. influenzae were resistant from ampicillin, whereas S. pyogenes isolates were resistant from erythromycin (Karchmer 2004).

Nowadays, the resistance of bacteria against existing antibiotics has been at alarming stage throughout the world with high mortality rate due to acute infections by various bacteria in respiratory infections in China, so more studies are required to isolate the novel bacterial strains resistant to various antibiotics. The pool of isolated resistant bacteria will be used to develop the potential strategy so as to target the regulation of bacterial resistance mechanisms to enhance the potency of available drugs, restore the efficacy of available drugs and develop the new range of antibiotics specific to new mechanism of drug resistance (Lister et al. 2009). In the present study, attempts were made to isolate the bacterial species from the infected persons of different age groups residing in different localities in China which were resistant against commonly prescribed antibiotics in China.



Discussion

From the results in Table 1, it was observed that the maximum (64 %) number of isolates was obtained from locality-1 (L-1), whereas lowest isolates were found in second locality (L-2). The possible reason for maximum isolates from L-1 could be the unhygienic living standards as well as damp and humid environment which were the favorable conditions for the growth and development of various pathogens. Moreover, the locality was thickly populated which had also increased the risk of communicable infections.

Table 2 shows bacterial isolates found in three different age groups, and depicts that H. influenzae was the most dominant during secondary respiratory tract infections in children. This age group included mostly the school/college going children. Many students were found to be underweight, malnourished and debilitated due to which they were having lower immunity and more vulnerable to the respiratory infections. The minimum isolates (20.52 %) were obtained from the age group of 26–45 years among which the 12.66 % isolates were S. pneumoniae as this age group was basically composed of the healthy adults working in hygienic conditions and found to have good immunity against infections. In the age group of 46–65 years which was mostly composed of old-age persons, 30.32 % of isolates were obtained with 20 % of H. influenzae.

Antibiotic susceptibility studies showed H. influenzae to be highly resistant to ampicillin and erythromycin, however, it was least resistant to ciprofloxacin and gentamicin. It has been reported that in H. influenzae, the resistance from ampicillin and amoxicillin was mediated by TEM-1 β-lactamase enzyme (Rennie and Ibrahim 2005). In previous studies, chloramphenicol was considered as the best antibiotic against H. influenzae, but few studies in north India revealed no resistance from this drug (Puri et al. 1999). Ampicillin inhibits the cell wall synthesis of bacteria by binding to penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs) so, maybe due to mutations or environmental changes in bacteria, ampicillin was not able to bind with the PBPs resulting in bacterial resistance to ampicillin (Sharma et al. 2013). Also, erythromycin was not able to inhibit the growth of H. influenzae even at higher concentrations which might be due to some protective mechanism that it developed against erythromycin. Few studies had also reported H. influenzae resistance toward ciprofloxacin due to mutations in the quinolone resistance-determining regions (QRDRs) of gyrA and parC (Brenwald et al. 2003). Ciprofloxacin inhibits the bacterial replication, transcription and repair by inactivating topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV enzymes. But in this study, H. influenzae showed no resistance against ciprofloxacin. Along with ciprofloxacin, gentamicin was also found to be effective against H. influenzae strains due to its irreversible binding to 30S units of bacterial ribosomes which inhibits its protein synthesis. Ciprofloxacin and gentamicin both were reported to be susceptible for H. influenzae in previous studies (Zanchi et al. 1994).

On the other hand, S. aureus was resistant to β-lactam antibiotics as well as marcolide antibiotics. Although S. aureus has broad-spectrum resistance against different class of antibiotics such as β-lactams, glycopeptides, quinolones, aminoglycosides, oxazolidinones, quinupristin–dalfopristin due to presence of various resistance genes (Lowy 2003), in another study, S. aureus was found to be resistant against methicillin antibiotics due to presence of mec and ccr genes (Chambers and Deleo 2010); but in this study, ciprofloxacin, chloramphenicol and gentamicin were found to be highly susceptible for S. aureus with low resistance. Due to the horizontal gene transfer of complex genetic array of mec element or vanA operon, it became resistant to different types of antibiotics (Pantosti et al. 2007). Cefuroxime was having moderate effect on S. aureus with 61 % sensitivity.

S. pneumoniae is a major causative agent in respiratory tract infections in humans, and they were once highly penicillin-susceptible microorganisms, but recently, they were found to be multidrug-resistant (Tomasz 1997). S. pneumoniae has been found to be responsible for estimated one million deaths each year in children below 5 years (Obaro et al. 1996). Susceptibility of S. pneumoniae was studied in Canada, and it was observed that ciprofloxacin was having poor potency against S. pneumoniae (Patel et al. 2011). After 10 years of use in United States, the susceptibility of ciprofloxacin was examined with S. pneumoniae, and the MIC was observed to be increased due to bacterial resistance (Sahm et al. 2000).

C. pneumoniae was observed to be highly resistant against chloramphenicol and erythromycin in this study. In previous studies, it was observed that C. pneumoniae is susceptible to erythromycin, azithromycin, roxithromycin, clarithromycin, doxycycline, ofloxacin, and rifampin, and their combination is more lethal (Freidank et al. 1999) which was in agreement with our study.
