


Introduction

The widespread use of increasing number of pesticides in agriculture has acquired great importance due to direct and indirect hazards to human health and environment. Globally, about 3 × 109 kg of pesticides is applied annually (Pan-UK 2003); however, a large amount of applied pesticides often never reach their intended target due to their degradation, volatilization and leaching, leading to serious ecological problems (Chen et al. 2009; Chevillard et al. 2012). Fipronil [5-Amino-3-cyano-1-(2, 6-dichloro 4 trifluoromethylphenyl)-4-trifluoromethyl sulfinyl pyrazole] is a phenyl pyrazole insecticide first synthesized by Rhone Poulenc Ag Company (now Bayer Crop Science) in 1987, introduced for use in 1993 and registered in the U.S. in 1996 (Tomlin 2000; Ware 2000; Tingle et al. 2003). It is one of the most persistent, lipophilic and toxic insecticides licensed for use since dieldrin, lindane and DDT (Mohapatra et al. 2010). It controls a broad spectrum of insects such as rice stem borer, leaf folder, cockroaches, mosquitoes, locust, ticks and fleas at both their larval and adult stages (Chanton et al. 2001; Aajoud et al. 2003). Fipronil is a “new generation” insecticide as its mode of action does not follow the common biochemical pathways of classical insecticides such as, pyrethroids (sodium channel blockers), organophosphates, and carbamate (cholinesterase inhibitors) to which some insects have developed resistance (Aajoud et al. 2003). Fipronil elicits its toxicity by blocking the GABA-gated chloride channel in the nervous system, resulting in a disruption of neuron signalling and eventually shutdown of the central nervous system (Ecobichon 1996). Fipronil degradation results in the formation of metabolites viz. sulfide, sulfone, amide and desulfinyl (Gunasekara et al. 2007). The half-life of fipronil in soil varies greatly, ranging from 3 days to 7 months.

Bioremediation processes are considered to be cost effective tool for the detoxification of xenobiotics as microbes play an important role in removing toxic substances from the environment (Li et al. 2012; Paliwal et al. 2015a). Microbes have been used in remediation of pesticide contaminated environment (Ramanathan and Lalithakumari 1999; Phugare and Jadhav 2014; Sidhu et al. 2014). Previously, microbial degradation of fipronil was reported in literature (Zhu et al. 2004; Masutti and Mermut 2007; Lin et al. 2008) but very few reports are available on isolation and characterization of specific bacteria, able to degrade fipronil. For instance, Bacillus firmus and Bacillus thuringiensis were found to be competent in the rapid degradation of fipronil (Mandal et al. 2013, 2014). In addition Paracoccus sp. was also found to degrade fipronil (Kumar et al. 2012). Rate of fipronil degradation was reported to affect by many environmental factors including temperature, pH, moisture, formulation, soil composition and biotic factors (Zhu et al. 2004; Masutti and Mermut 2007). For effective biodegradation therefore, it is essential to optimize the process as it makes the technology strong by improving the microbial activities (Prakasham et al. 2005; Paliwal et al. 2015b). However, in none of the previous study, optimization of environmental factors, affecting the rate of fipronil degradation by microbes was conducted.

The aim of this study was therefore to isolate and characterize bacteria, capable of degrading fipronil. Present study reports fipronil degradation by Stenotrophomonas acidaminiphila for the first time. Besides this, response surface methodology (RSM) based on the Box–Behnken design was used to determine the optimum environmental conditions for growth and fipronil degradation by S. acidaminiphila. Metabolites formed as a result of degradation were identified and a novel metabolic pathway for fipronil degradation by S. acidaminiphila was proposed. The degradation rate of fipronil in soil inoculated with S. acidaminiphila, based on the kinetics of degradation was studied. This paper also highlights potential use of pure cultured S. acidaminiphila cells for the remediation of fipronil contaminated soils.


