
Abstract

In this study, the optimization of different process variables—pH (4–6), aeration rate (200–550 rpm) and agitation rate (0.6–1.8 vvm) were investigated using rotating simplex method and uniform design method to enhance xylitol production from xylose by D. nepalensis in a batch stirred tank bioreactor. Maximum xylitol productivity (0.576 g L−1 h−1) was obtained at pH 4.0, agitation 300 rpm and aeration 1.5 vvm by rotating simplex method. Individual optimum values of pH, agitation and aeration are 4.2, 370 rpm and 1.2 vvm, respectively, for productivity, 4.3, 350 rpm and 1.0 vvm, respectively for xylitol concentration and 4.4, 360 rpm and 0.8 vvm, respectively for yield. Using generalized distance approach, the simultaneous optimal values were found to be—pH 4.3, 370 rpm and 0.9 vvm. After multi-response analysis, batch fermentation at optimal operating conditions resulted in enhanced productivity (0.76 g L−1 h−1), xylitol concentration (59.4 g L−1) and yield (0.58 g g−1) with an increase of 76.74 % of xylitol productivity.



Introduction

Xylitol is a naturally occurring non-fermentable sugar alcohol with one third calories lesser than sucrose (Granström et al. 2007). Being a low caloric sweetener, it is used as a suitable sugar substitute for diabetic patients, parenteral nutrition (Ladefoged et al. 1982), odontological preparations (Maguire and Rugg-Gunn 2003) and also known to improve health and biomechanical properties of the bone (Mattila et al. 2002). In recent years, interest in xylitol has increased considerably, mainly due to many commercial applications in several industrial sectors like food, dental and pharmaceuticals. Increasing interest in xylitol has led to a strong demand for the product in global market. In 2013, global consumption of xylitol was estimated to be 160 thousand metric tons equating to approximately 670 million USD in value and is expected to reach 1 billion USD in 2020 (Hou-Rui 2012). To meet the world’s increasing demand, it is indispensable to produce xylitol in large scale.

The industrial production of xylitol is performed by chemical hydrogenation of xylose in the presence of metal catalysts like nickel, palladium and ruthium (Mikkola et al. 2000) at raucous operating conditions such as high temperature (80–140 °C) and 50 atm (Parajó et al. 1995). Furthermore, it also requires pure substrate (xylose) for hydrogenation, thus adding the refining cost to the total production cost. Alternatively, extraction of xylitol from natural sources is uneconomical because of its low availability (Parajó et al. 1998a). Microbial or enzymatic production of xylitol is becoming a more sustainable alternative. Biotechnological production of xylitol is gaining more interest as the operating conditions are at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, ease in purification and relatively economical and safe process (Rodrigues et al. 2011).

Bioconversion of xylose to xylitol can be carried out by bacteria, fungi and yeast. Among the reported microbial strains, Candida (Barbosa et al. 1988) and Debaryomyces (Converti and Domínguez 2001; Converti et al. 2002) are the best known yeast species for xylitol production. Biotechnological production of xylitol is influenced by several factors which includes age and inoculum concentration, initial substrate concentration (Converti et al. 2002), pH, temperature (Converti and Domínguez 2001), aeration and agitation conditions of the fermentation process (Sampaio et al. 2008; Parajó et al. 1998b; Silva et al. 1998). pH of the medium also plays a vital role in the enhanced production of xylitol as pH affects the transport of xylose across the cell membrane (Silva et al. 2011). It has been reported that xylose to xylitol conversion by microorganisms is strongly affected by oxygen supply. Under anaerobic condition, xylose is not utilized and xylitol formation is possible only in yeast with NADH-XR (xylose reductase) activity. In the presence of excess aeration, NADH is reoxidized by respiratory chain, catalyzed by NAD+ dependent xylitol dehydrogenase (XDH) and xylitol is consumed for growth (Gírio et al. 1994). These results suggest that pH of the medium, aeration and agitation rates are very much crucial for enhanced xylitol production in bioreactor.

Previously, we isolated Debaryomyces nepalensis NCYC 3413, a halotolerant yeast strain from rotten apple, which is capable of utilizing xylose as a sole carbon source to produce xylitol (Gummadi and Kumar 2006; Kumar and Gummadi 2011a). The enzyme xylose reductase involved in the conversion of xylose to xylitol has been purified from this strain and characterized (Kumar and Gummadi 2011b). The effect of controlled pH, aeration and agitation rates on xylitol production has been studied in bioreactor (Kumdam and Gummadi 2015). To develop economical bioprocess, optimization of process conditions should be performed by considering responses such as product concentration, product yield and productivity.

To identify the effect of process parameters on the productivity and yield of xylitol, large number of experiments has to be conducted. Conventional statistical experimental methods such as the Taguchi and orthogonal experimental designs have been employed to reduce the number of experimental runs (Li et al. 2004). Fang and Wang developed a new statistical method, the uniform design (UD) of experiment, which further reduces the number of experiments when the levels of the factors are large (Fang and Lin 2003). This study deals with the optimization of different process variables—pH, aeration rate and agitation rate to enhance xylitol production in a batch stirred tank bioreactor using rotating simplex method and uniform design method. The number of experiments is low and as well as the number of the levels at which the variables studied are higher in this method when compared to other conventional statistical experimental designs (Cai et al. 2014).

An attempt has been made to determine the simultaneous optimal values of process parameters to obtain maximum yield, productivity and xylitol concentration by multi response analysis.


