
Abstract

Metal bioaccessibility is an alarming issue in croplands of mining sites due to overloading of toxic metals. Hence, the present study is aimed to determine the overloading of toxic metal in croplands across the Tawag village, Hutti, Raichur, India. Correspondingly, to identify the soil bacterial growth, physiological oxidative stress enzyme activity and surface macromolecular functional group evolution were analysed in and around the toxic metal contaminated sites through FT-IR and FT-Raman spectrometry. The evaluated results attribute that the study area is heavily polluted with the toxic metals such as arsenic, cadmium, chromium, lead and zinc. However, biochemical and 16S rRNA gene sequence homology tree confirmed that the arsenic and cadmium-resistant isolate belongs to Bacillus sp. MDPMK-02 and retrieved unique Gene Bank ID KT596811 (accession number) at National Centre for Biotechnology information (NCBI), India. Additionally, sodium arsenite-amended culture media possessing reduced biomass and enhanced the activity of oxidative stress defence enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) than cadmium chloride-amended medium and control. Subsequently, the infrared (IR) and Raman spectral analytical assessment distinguish that arsenic-treated Gram-positive isolate membrane fetched high percentage of hydration, elevation of surface polysaccharides, proteins and polyhydroxybutyric acid (PHBA) molecular specific stretch intensity compared to cadmium exposures. From these results, the study concluded that the mining wastes significantly pollute the surrounding croplands, and also Bacillus sp. MDPMK-02 possesses good chemosensing for cross-protection and bio-adaptation of toxic metal ions. Hence, these isolates can be compiled and implemented in environmental hazardous management techniques such as bioremediation, bioleaching and biodegradation.



Introduction

Nowadays accumulation of toxic metals through dumping of ore tailings and leachate overflow in and around mining environment is raising the alarm on ecological stress. The mining activities, especially in open-pit mining, typically generate the highest quantities of solid wastes in the form of waste rock and tailings (Mingliang and Haixia 2009). The discharge of acidic mine drainage (AMD) with elevated levels of heavy metals can contaminate the downstream water, agricultural soils, food crops, biota and pose a health risk to residents near the mining areas (Duruibe et al. 2007; Tian et al. 2009; Plumlee and Morman 2011). Heavy metal contamination by mining is a major environmental concern on a global scale, particularly in developing countries (Zhuang et al. 2014). Moreover, cadmium is relatively a typical element not found in the pure state in nature. Its principal uses include protective plating for steel, stabilizers for polyvinyl chloride pigments in plastics and glasses, electrode material in nickel–cadmium batteries and as a component of various alloys and ceramics (Govil et al. 2008). Mine drainage water, waste water from the processing of ore and rainwater run-off from the general ore tailing area and improper disposal of trace elements from industrial wastes ultimately leads to toxic metal especially cadmium pollution (Arhin et al. 2015).

Arsenic (As) is another trace element released from the mine wastes into ground and surface water systems, as well as the geological environment due to their solubility and mobility (Bempah et al. 2013). Arsenic is a silver-gray or white metallic solid element found in nature. The high positive contributions of the anthropogenic mining activities are the major source of the various toxic element, such as As, Pb, and Zn (Marmolejo-Rodríguez et al. 2011). Cropland soil adjacent to an area of historical mining, ore processing and smelting activities reflects the historical background and a mixing of recent toxic heavy metal contamination (Duruibe et al. 2007). Direct atmospheric deposition is occurring near agricultural land from mining and smelting processes and dust particles originating from open tailings ponds (Chrastný et al. 2012).

The soil is heterogeneous in nature, containing many microhabitats that are suitable for microbial growth. Soil microorganisms are playing a vital role in maintaining the balance of soil biogeochemical cycle and soil fertility. These are also involved in various environmentally beneficial applications including bioremediation, biodegradation, biofuel production and bioleaching of mining ore tailings and waste water treatment. Anthropogenic activities, such as rural and industrial development, agricultural pesticides and ore tailings release the toxic heavy metals into soil (Govil et al. 2008). Increasing mining activities has augmented the incidence of percolation of toxic metal ions to the surrounding ecosystem and reached an alarming level (Kulshrestha et al. 2013). The random dumping of hazardous waste in the industrial area could be the main cause of the groundwater and soil contamination (Bhagure and Mirgane 2011). Toxic metallic pollution potentially affects soil microbial diversity by inhibiting physiological mechanisms like respiration, transport of Mg2+, sodium–potassium ionic and also reduces the growth (Vijayalakshmi et al. 2011). It is mysterious how the microbial diversity can potentially influence the ecological imbalance in an ecosystem. In order to understand the behaviour of microbial cells at interfaces, it is relevant to study the structure, chemical composition and physicochemical properties of their surfaces.

The toxicity of heavy metal ions possessing strong binding affinity to metal-sensitive functional groups on cell surfaces such as amides, thiol or histidyl moieties even at low concentrations, which leads to conformational modification, denaturation and inactivation or hyperactivity of enzymes, irregular molecular intracellular distribution and organelle integrity (Bae and Chen 2004). Prokaryotes are less compartmentalized compared to eukaryotes, does not have intracellular membrane-bound organelles but chemical composition and structures of the cell wall and cytoplasm are highly complex. They possess diverse molecular and supramolecular structures outside plasma membrane (Naumann 2000). Bacteria are highly sensitive to surrounding environmental conditions even at small changes deny growth and developing endospores. The sustainability of bacterial strains to cope up with sudden changes in the surrounding environment ensures their ecological dominance under stress conditions.

Presently, the major challenge is to study the microbial membrane heterogeneity under toxic stress conditions. The wide microbial surface complexity evolution is further emphasizing the need of single cell membrane architecture analysing techniques. Extra polymeric substances (EPS) are the biopolymer which consists of polysaccharides, proteins, nucleic acids and lipids and plays an important role during biofilm formation, maturation and external protection from hazardous substances (Wang et al. 2012). Electron microscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy have been used to observe the EPS since past years (Guerrero-Ferreira and Wright 2015). But this technique requires complicated sample preparation, maintains the sample under high vacuum and time consuming, which leads to sample distortion. Other microscopic techniques such as light microscopy, fluorescence microscopy, confocal laser scanning and AFM microscopy have been used for cell intracellular molecular localizations and surface topography (Zemer 2009), but these resolutions remain limited for detailed observation of extra polymeric substances functional analysis.

Apart from the newly evaluated analytical spectral analyses provide accurate and molecular quantitative functional specific intensity for whole bacterial samples. Raman spectroscopy provides advantages over FT-IR spectroscopy because in the former sample need not be dried. Therefore, Raman spectroscopy has been extensively used in the biological sample analysis (Harz et al. 2009). Raman spectroscopy facilitates the analysis of hydrated biofilm cell samples (Movasaghi et al. 2008; Ivleva et al. 2010). Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) and Raman spectroscopy provide fast and accurate detection of microorganisms. Both these spectral analysis can provide whole organism fingerprint and provide a broad range of biochemical properties about bacteria in a single spectrum (Lu et al. 2011b). FT-IR spectroscopy can characterize bacteria as biochemical information about cellular components including proteins and peptides, carbohydrate, nucleic acids, phospholipids and murein are detectable (Al-Qadiri et al. 2008).

Hence, the present study probes to determine frequent heavy metal pollution and its impact on geochemistry of Tawag crop lands soil, arsenic and cadmium toxic stress sustainable indigenous bacterial defence enzymes activity with respective growth rate. Correspondingly, the toxic metal bio-absorbing bacterial chemosensing extracellular polymeric substances functional group flexibility was analysed through FT-IR and FT-Raman spectrometer.


