
Abstract

Apple pomace, a waste product from the apple juice industry is a potential feedstock for biofuel and biorefinery chemical production. Optimisation of hydrolysis conditions for apple pomace hydrolysis using Viscozyme L and Celluclast 1.5L was investigated using 1 L reaction volumes. The effects of temperature, pH, β-glucosidase supplementation and substrate feeding regimes were determined. Hydrolysis at room temperature using an unbuffered system gave optimal performance. Reactors in batch mode resulted in a better performance (4.2 g/L glucose and 16.8 g/L reducing sugar, 75 % yield for both) than fed-batch (3.2 g/L glucose and 14.6 g/L reducing sugar, 65.5 and 73.1 % yield respectively) in 72 h. The addition of Novozyme 188 to the core mixture of Viscozyme L and Celluclast 1.5L resulted in the doubling of glucose released. The main products (yield %) released from apple pomace hydrolysis were galacturonic acid (78 %), glucose (75 %), arabinose (90 %) and galactose (87 %). These products are potential raw materials for biofuel and biorefinery chemical production.



Introduction

Apple pomace is the waste produced from the extraction of juice from apples. Large quantities of waste are produced worldwide every year, with 25–35 % of the 70 million metric tonnes produced ending up as waste (Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations 2012; Gullon et al. 2008), an estimated 17–24 million metric tonnes per year (Van Dyk et al. 2013). In most cases, the pomace is disposed of, which poses major environmental and health problems due to its high moisture content (70–75 %), high chemical oxygen demand (COD, 10,000 mg/L) and biological oxygen demand (BOD) (Bhushan et al. 2008; Capek et al. 1995; Mahmood et al. 2010; Parmar and Rupasinghe 2013). Combining treatment of this waste with production of value-added products can solve disposal problems, while potentially creating additional revenue in the bio-economy.

Apple pomace is lignocellulosic in nature and a rich source of cellulose, pectin and hemicellulose, which can be enzymatically converted to sugar monomers and other value-added products such as acetic acid, galacturonic acid, phenolics, vanillin, etc. (Bhushan et al. 2008; Foyle et al. 2007; Joshi and Attri 2006; Parmar and Rupasinghe 2013; Vendruscolo and Ninow 2014). Enzymatic degradation of lignocellulosic substrates requires a number of enzymes, working in synergy. Cellulose degradation requires cellobiohydrolases, endoglucanases and β-glucosidases. While hemicellulose and the enzymes required for its degradation have been studied, hemicellulose composition can be variable. In the case of apple pomace, the hemicellulose composition has not been studied and therefore it is not clear which enzymes are required. Some authors have indicated that apple pomace contains xylan (Bhushan et al. 2008; Dhillon et al. 2012; Parmar and Rupasinghe 2012), which would indicate a requirement for endoxylanases and β-xylosidases, as well as possible debranching enzymes. However, the xylose found in apple pomace could also be present in the form of xyloglucan or xylogalacturonan. Le Bourvellec et al. indicated that fucogalactoxyloglucan was the main hemicellulose in apple pomace. This could indicate a requirement for a completely different set of enzymes compared to xylan hydrolysis, for example xyloglucanases.

Apple pomace also contains high levels of pectin. However, studies on pectin degradation in complex substrates have been very limited. Pectin is highly complex and many enzymes have activity on pectin, for example methyl esterase, acetyl esterase, pectate lyase, pectin lyase, endo-polygalacturonase, exo-polygalacturonase, arabinase and galactanase (Van den Brink and de Vries 2011; Voragen et al. 2009). Pectinases usually refer to the enzymes that cleave the backbone to release galacturonic acid, while arabinase and galactanase cleave the neutral side chains in rhamnogalacturonan I into neutral sugars, arabinose and galactose.

Commercially available enzyme cocktails contain multiple enzymes which act on lignocellulose, with different cocktails optimised for different substrates. As there are no ready-made cocktails for apple pomace degradation, we investigated combinations of cocktails which together would contain the enzymes required for its hydrolysis.


