


Introduction

Endosulfan is a cyclodiene organo-chlorine. It is a mixture of the two isomers, α and β-Endosulfan. Both of these isomers are toxic, with the α-isomer being more toxic than β-isomer (JenNi et al. 2005). It is used extensively throughout the world as a contact and stomach insecticide and as an acaricide on field crops, such as cotton, paddy, sorghum, oilseeds, coffee, vegetables, and fruit crops (Lee et al. 1995; Kullman and Matsumura 1996). It is used to control chewing and sucking insects, such as Colorado beetle, flea beetle, cabbage worm aphids and leaf hopper (Goebel 1982; Hoechst 1990). Endosulfan has been implicated in mammalian gonadal toxicity (Sinha et al. 1997), genotoxicity (Chaudhuri et al. 1999), and neurotoxicity (Paul and Balasubramaniam 1997).

Biodegradation of pesticides can be carried out using free as well as immobilized cells. Research has suggested that this higher productivity results from cellular or genetic modifications induced by immobilization. Evidences indicate that the immobilized cells are much more tolerant to perturbations in the reaction environment, are less susceptible to toxic substances make immobilized cell systems, and are particularly attractive for the treatment of toxic substances, such as pesticides (Manohar et al. 2001; Kim et al. 2002; Jianlong et al. 2002). Various materials have been selected as carriers for the immobilization of microorganisms to treat wastewater, including network polymers, alginate, polyacylamide hydrazide, calcium alginate, activated pumice, and activated carbon (Pai et al. 1995; Murakami et al. 2003; Pazarlioglu and Telefoncu 2005; Rahman et al. 2006; Karigar et al. 2006).

There are reports on the biodegradation of pesticides using immobilized cells (Ha et al. 2009; Yáñez-Ocampo et al. 2011; Abdel-Razek et al. 2013) and immobilized enzymes (Richins et al. 2000; Mansee et al. 2005). However, studies on the degradation of Endosulfan using immobilized cells are limited (Jo et al. 2010).

Aerobic bacteria degrading Endosulfan were isolated from contaminated sludge by Yu et al.. LD-6 was one of the isolates, which was identified as Stenotrophomonas spp. Cell crude extract of strain LD-6 could metabolize Endosulfan rapidly, and degradative enzymes were intracellular distributed and constitutively expressed. Shivaramaiah and Kennedy studied the biodegradation of Endosulfan by a soil bacterium S3 which consistently degraded Endosulfan. Endosulfan degradation results indicated that the enzyme system responsible was probably a mono-oxygenase, converting Endosulfan to Endosulfan sulfate. Katayama and Matsumura showed that the cultures of Trichoderma harzianum were capable of producing Endosulfan diol as a principal metabolite. They suggested that a hydrolytic enzyme sulfatase is responsible for the indirect formation of Endosulfan diol by the hydrolysis of Endosulfan sulfate.

Genes involved in the degradation of Endosulfan have also been studied by many researchers (Weir et al. 2006; Verma et al. 2011; Vijaiyan and Rajam 2013). Sutherland et al. (2002a) reported the role of esd gene in degrading Endosulfan.

The batch degradation study using free cells and Ca-alginate immobilized cells of Ps. aeruginosa JX204836 isolated from an agricultural field was carried out by us and reported in our earlier publication, where immobilized cells showed a better degradation potential at higher pesticide concentrations compared to free cells (Vijayalakshmi and Usha 2012). The present study is taken up with the objective of studying the continuous and repeated batch degradation of Endosulfan using immobilized cells of Ps. aeruginosa, isolated from a soil amended with the pesticide. The research also involves the study of genes and the enzymes involved in the degradation of Endosulfan, so that the enzymes could also be immobilized and utilized for the process of bioremediation of waters contaminated with endosulfan.



Discussion

In the current study, when repeated batch degradation study was carried out, immobilized cells of Ps. aeruginosa were able to show 60 % degradation of Endosulfan at the end of the 35th cycle with a cell leakage of 642 × 104 Cfu/mL. In similar studies, Endosulfan degrading ability of Klebsiella oxytoca KE-8 immobilized by entrapment with activated carbon was investigated by Jo et al.. Activated carbon with immobilized cells K. Oxytoca KE-8 that had been used for one degradation activity was stored for 1, 15, and 30 days at 4 °C. Endosulfan degradation activity after one month duration was 81 %, compared to 98 % before storage.

Immobilized cells have been used for the degradation of various pesticides. In the current study, a degradation of 100 % was obtained with 2 % concentration of Endosulfan up to 100 mL/h flow rate and with 4 % concentration of Endosulfan up to 80 mL/h flow rate. With 10 % concentration of pesticide at 100 mL/h flow rate, 85 % degradation of Endosulfan was recorded. Recycle packed bed column mode and continuous packed bed column mode for Endosulfan degradation were also studied by Jo et al.. The effect of the hydraulic retention time (from 25 to 300 min) on the performance of bioreactor was studied by them with variation in the influent flow rate. The immobilized cells in a laboratory scale pack bed column with support beads were able to degrade Endosulfan completely in defined minimal salt medium at a maximum rate of 129.6 μg/mL per day, under optimum operation condition.

Column studies with calcium alginate entrapped cells of Pseudomonas fluorescens was carried out by Jesitha et al.. They reported that broth mineral medium was supplemented with 350 μg/L endosulfan and was passed through the column at the rate of 0.59 mL/min and the column was operated for 18 days. At this rate, the hydraulic retention time reported was 300 min. The studies reported that the integrity of the beads was maintained.

Similar studies were also carried out by Yañez-Ocampo et al. (Yáñez-Ocampo et al. 2011) using a tezontle-packed up-flow reactor (TPUFR) with an immobilized bacterial consortium for biological treatment of methyl-parathion and tetrachlorvinphos. In the bioreactor, four flow rates (0.936, 1.41, 2.19, and 3.51 l/h) and four hydraulic residence times (0.313, 0.206, 0.133, and 0.083 h) were evaluated. With an operating time of 8 h and a flow of 0.936 l/h, they obtained 75 % efficiency in the removal of methyl-parathion and tetrachlorvinphos.

To create an E. coli expression construct, Sutherland et al. (2002a) amplified the esd gene by PCR using pYUB415-Apa3 as the template. However, in the current study, when the genome of Ps. aeruginosa was subjected to PCR for the amplification of esd gene, there was no amplified product of ~1350 bp expected to be involved in the oxidative pathway of degradation of Endosulfan in the culture. The absence of esd gene product could mean that ese gene may be present in Ps. aeruginosa. A gene, ese, encoding an enzyme capable of degrading both isomers of Endosulfan and endosulfate was isolated from Arthrobacter by Weir et al.. The enzyme belongs to the two-component flavin-dependent mono-oxygenase family, whose members require reduced flavin for activity. An overview of aerobic endosulfan degradation by bacteria and fungi, and a summary of recent advances and prospects in this research field were given by Kataoka and Takagi. Pathway summarized by the authors indicated difference in products accumulated when the degradation occurs with the involvement of ese and esd genes. According to the authors, ese indicated the pathway described by Weir et al. involving ese mono-oxygenase, whereas esd indicated the pathway described by Sutherland et al. (2002b) involving esd mono-oxygenase.

According to Seralathan et al., only the human CYP (cytochrome P450) enzymes and two bacterial genes (esd and ese) have been reported for endosulfan biotransformation (Kahli et al. 2006; Sean et al. 2008; Sutherland et al. 2002a). Thus, the genetic information on endosulfan metabolism is scanty, and it is a major setback for endosulfan biotransformation.

The other possibility in our present study could be the absence of both esd and ese gene products. In similar studies, PCR primers pairs coding for flavin mononucleotide-dependent mono-oxygenase present in a Mycobacterium spp. (esd) and mono-oxygenase of Arthrobacter spp. (ese) were employed by Bajaj et al. to amplify 1347-bp and 1428-bp, respectively. Genomic DNA of IITR01 as a template with the primer, pairs (esd1 and esd2) internal to the esd gene did not yield the expected gene product size 780 and 620, respectively; instead, a fragment of 600 bp was obtained from the genomic DNA of strain IITR01. The ese mono-oxygenase, which is 1428 bp, was also found to be absent, as they could obtain a non-specific PCR product of 682 bp. Later studies by them revealed that the nucleotide sequences belonged to transporter protein family.

Our current investigation indicates the fact that Endosulfan degradation by the organism is probably by the non-oxidative, alternate pathway. This observation is supported by the fact that predicted products of Endosulfan degradation in the current study by Ps. aeruginosa are Endosulfan ether and Endosulfan lactone, which are the products seen in the non-oxidative pathway of Endosulfan degradation. Although the first intermediate, endosulfan diol was not detected by us, since further metabolites were detected, such a pathway is proposed. The absence of the metabolites endosulfan sulfate and Endosulfan mono alcohol further confirms the presence of non-oxidative pathway. The non-oxidative pathway shows the presence of relatively non-toxic metabolites compared to the parent compound and the metabolites, such as endosulfan sulfate, seen in other pathways. Similar results were obtained by Yu et al.. In their studies, Endosulfan diol and Endosulfan ether were detected as major metabolites, which indicated that the bacterium Stenotrophomonas spp. LD-6 might degrade Endosulfan by a non-oxidative pathway. They reported that 100 mg/L Endosulfan was completely degraded within 10 days, and Endosulfan diol and Endosulfan ether were detected as major metabolites. Kumar et al., also reported that the hydrolysis of endosulfan in some bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia cepaeia) yields the less toxic metabolite endosulfan diol. The diol can be converted to endosulfan ether (Hussain et al. 2007) or endosulfan hydroxyether (Lee et al. 2003) and then endosulfan lactone (Awasthi et al. 2003). Hydrolysis of endosulfan lactone yields endosulfan hydroxycarboxylate (Walse et al. 2003).

Based on our degradation studies, LC–MS of degradation products, and PCR analysis, the non-oxidative pathway for degradation of Endosulfan was predicted, which is shown in Fig. 11. Here, it is proposed that Endosulfan, which is a cyclodiene organo-chlorine, is converted to a less toxic intermediate, the endodiol form, and Endosulfan diol, which is further converted to Endosulfan ether and then to Endosulfan lactone. This pathway could involve the enzymes, such as hydrolases and mono-oxygenases, which need to be further studied. Similar results have been reported by Li et al. that the formation of Endosulfan diol and Endosulfan ether as the major metabolites of Endosulfan degradation by Achromobacter xylosoxidans CS5 and suggested a non-oxidative pathway of degradation. Bajaj et al. reported the formation of hydroxylated products ES diol, Endosulfan ether, and Endosulfan lactone by a Pseudomonas spp. strain IITR01.Fig. 11Proposed pathway of Endosulfan degradation

Fig. 11

Proposed pathway of Endosulfan degradation

Endosulfan degradation was better with cell lysate of Ps. aeruginosa compared to buffer wash and supernatant. Similar results were obtained by Yu et al., who demonstrated that the cell crude extract of strain LD-6, Stenotrophomonas spp. could metabolize Endosulfan rapidly and degradative enzymes were intracellularly distributed.
