
Abstract

A Gram-positive bacterium was isolated from mangrove soil and was identified as Bacillus licheniformis (KC710973). The potential of a mangrove microorganism to utilize different natural waste carbon substrates for biosurfactant production and biodegradation of hydrocarbons was evaluated. Among several substrates used in the present study, orange peel was found to be best substrate of biosurfactant yield with 1.796 g/L and emulsification activity of 75.17 % against diesel. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy analysis of biosurfactant compound revealed that the isolated biosurfactant is in lipopeptide nature. The 1H-NMR of the extracted biosurfactant from B. licheniformis has a doublet signal at 0.8–0.9 ppm corresponding to six hydrogen atoms suggests the presence of a terminal isopropyl group. The spectra showed two main regions corresponding to resonance of α-carbon protons (3.5–5.5 ppm) and side-chain protons (0.25–3.0 ppm). All the data suggests that the fatty acid residue is from lipopeptide. From the biodegradation studies, it concluded that the biosurfactant produced by B. licheniformis further can add to its value as an ecofriendly and biodegradable product.



Introduction

Environmental pollution with petroleum and petrochemical products has attracted much attention in recent decades. Microorganisms having the ability to degrade many poly aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been explained, and their mechanisms of action have been studied (Cerniglia 1992). The bioremediation of soils contaminated with PAHs is limited by the poor availability of these hydrophobic contaminants to microorganisms (Mihelcic et al. 1993). The presence of distinct types of automobiles and machinery has engendered in an increase in the use of lubricating oil. Spillage of used motor oils such as diesel or jet fuel contaminates our natural environment with hydrocarbon (Abioye et al. 2012). The illegal dumping of used motor oil is an environmental hazard with global ramifications (Blodgett 2001). Used motor oil contains metals and heavy polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) that could contribute to chronic hazards including mutagenicity and carcinogenicity (Hagwell et al. 1992; Boonchan et al. 2000). Microbial surface active agents or biosurfactants are extracellular products consisting of hydrophobic and hydrophilic moieties and tend to interact with surfaces of different polarities and reduce the surface and interfacial tension of solutions, facilitating hydrocarbon uptake and emulsification/dispersion. They can improve the bioavailability of hydrocarbons to the microbial cells by increasing the area of contact at the aqueous–hydrocarbon interface. This increases the rate of hydrocarbon dissolution and their utilization by microorganisms (Singh et al. 2007; Satpute et al. 2010; Perfumo et al. 2006).

Generally biosurfactant production are using expensive carbon sources, it could be replaced with cheaply available natural raw materials. Agro-industrial wastes are with high contents of lipids and carbohydrates; it can be used as a carbon source for biosurfactant production (Makkar and Cameotra 2002). Mangroves ecosystems are the plant communities occurring in inter-tidal zones along the coasts of tropical and sub-tropical countries. Mangroves represent a rich and diverse living resource and are valuable to both the economy and protection of coastal environments. They have been considered as significant sinks for pollutions from freshwater discharges and from contaminated tidal water (Bernard et al. 1996; Reda and El Nagar 2009). However, the reports on biosurfactants produced by mangrove sediment microorganisms have been limited to date (Saimmai et al. 2012a, b, c). The objective of the present study was to produce biosurfactant from natural waste substrates by Bacillus licheniformis and evaluate their ability to degrade naphthalene and crude oil.


