
Abstract

In this study, we report the expression level of CaSQS, CabAS and CaCYS, the genes involved in phytosterol and triterpene metabolic pathway of centella (Centella asiatica (L.) Urban), in cells elicited with salicylic acid (50–200 µM). Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern blot analysis indicated CaSQS, CabAS, and CaCYS genes expressed in both the wild-type and cultured cells (with and without elicitation). In elicited cells, expressions of CaSQS, CabAS, and CaCYS genes showed strong dependence on salicylic acid concentration and elicitation day. The highest expression of CabAS gene was found in the cells elicited with 100 µM salicylic acid on day 10 of inoculation. Salicylic acid treatment (50–200 µM) decreased expression level of CaCYS and CaSQS genes in elicited cells compared with the control.



Introduction

Centella (Centella asiatica (L.) Urban) is a perennial, faintly aromatic and a valuable medicinal herb. It is widely distributed throughout tropical and subtropical regions of the world (Seevaratnam et al. 2012). Centella has been used as a traditional herbal medicine in many Asian countries for hundreds of years (Brinkhaus et al. 2000).

Triterpene saponins are a class of plant secondary metabolites with structure derived from the precursor oxidosqualene in which one or more sugar residues are added (Yendo et al. 2010). Triterpene saponins in centella mainly include centellosides (asiaticoside, asiatic acid, madecassoside and madecassic acid) (Bylka et al. 2013). Extract of centella contains centellosides that can elevate antioxidant level in healing wounds, increasing fibroblast production, collagen formation and angiogenesis (Li et al. 2007; Shukla et al. 1999; Maquart et al. 1999). These components are also known to be clinically effective on systemic scleroderma, abnormal scar formation, and keloids (Hong et al. 2005). Although the centellosides have many important pharmaceutical properties, their content is not significant in plant, thus it is difficult to scale up production. Plant cell cultures were, therefore, widely used as a convenient tool to provide a valuable alternative for the production of important secondary metabolites for commercial interest.

There were some reports on the biosynthesis of centellosides and phytosterol from in vitro cultures of centella. These studies investigated into the effects of methyl jasmonate (MeJA), as an elicitor, in relation to expression levels of genes that participate in triterpene metabolism (isoprenoid pathway) in cultured centella cells such as CaSQS (Centella asiatica squalene synthase), CabAS (C. asiatica β-amyrin synthase), and CaCYS (C. asiatica cycloartenol synthase) (Fig. 1) (Kim et al. 2005a, b, c, 2009; Mangas et al. 2008). CaSQS and CabAS are two genes that produce large quantities of triterpene saponins such as asiaticoside and madecassoside, in which CaSQS is considered a key regulator gene. CaCYS gene codes cycloartenol synthase, the enzyme responsible for the first step in sterol biosynthesis (Mangas et al. 2006).Fig. 1Isoprenoid pathway in biosynthesis of phytosterol and triterpenoid in centella (Kim et al. 2005a, b, c, 2009; Mangas et al. 2008). FPS farnesyl diphosphate synthase, SE squalene epoxidase, OSC oxidosqualene cyclase

Fig. 1

Isoprenoid pathway in biosynthesis of phytosterol and triterpenoid in centella (Kim et al. 2005a, b, c, 2009; Mangas et al. 2008). FPS farnesyl diphosphate synthase, SE squalene epoxidase, OSC oxidosqualene cyclase

According to Jirage et al., salicylic acid is an important signal molecule, it activate genes related to plant protection against pathogenesis. When used as an elicitor, salicylic acid is very useful for the accumulation of the bioactive compounds relate to pathogenesis. However, there was no report on the effect of salicylic acid on the biosynthesis of centellosides, and the relationship between salicylic acid elicitation and metabolic genes in cultured cells. While this research direction was performed in some other plant species, for example Yu et al. found the relationship between expression levels of chs (chalcone synthase) and chi (chalcone isomerase) genes with contents of jaceosidin and syringin in Saussurea medusa cells treated with salicylic acid. Yousefzadi et al. found salicylic acid elicitation increased expression levels of the genes coding for phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, cinnamoyl-CoA reductase and cinnamyl-alcohol dehydrogenase in the first steps of podophyllotoxin pathway in Linum album. However, expression of the pinoresinol–lariciresinol reductase gene, which is involved in one of the last biosynthetic steps, was not affected by salicylic acid.

Our previous studies have demonstrated that an optimal concentration of salicylic acid (100 µM) can stimulate asiaticoside production, a major component of centelloside, in centella cells up to 229.83 mg/g dry weight, while an optimal concentration of MeJA (100 µM) or yeast extract (4 g/L) only enhances asiaticoside production to 205.92 or 165.41 mg/g dry weight, respectively (Loc and Giang 2012; Giang et al. 2015). So the present work was setup based on this idea to find the molecular mechanism of gene regulation under the influence of salicylic acid. The results may provide us with a clearer understanding of problems related to salicylic acid elicitation to improve the productivity of the centelloside biosynthesis in cultured cells of centella. The effect of salicylic acid on gene regulation in the isoprenoid pathway can be applied to control the biotechnological production of centelloside.


