
Abstract

Tribulus terrestris L., commonly called puncture vine and gokhru, is an important member of Zygophyllaceae. The species is highly important in context to therapeutic uses and provides important active principles responsible for treatment of various diseases and also used as tonic. It is widely distributed in tropical regions of India and the world. However, status of its genetic diversity remained concealed due to lack of research work in this species. In present study, genetic diversity and structure of different populations of T. terrestris from north India was examined at molecular level using newly developed Simple Sequence Repeat (SSR) markers. In total, 20 primers produced 48 alleles in a size range of 100–500 bp with maximum fragments amplified by TTMS-1, TTMS-25 and TTMS-33. Mean Polymorphism Information Content (PIC) and Marker Index (MI) were 0.368 and 1.01, respectively. Dendrogram showed three groups, one of which was purely containing accessions from Rajasthan while other two groups corresponded to Punjab and Haryana regions with intermixing of few other accessions. Analysis of molecular variance partitioned 76 % genetic variance within populations and 24 % among populations. Bayesian model based STRUCTURE analysis detected two genetic stocks for analyzed germplasm and also detected some admixed individuals. Different geographical populations of this species showed high level of genetic diversity. Results of present study can be useful in identifying diverse accessions and management of this plant resource. Moreover, the novel SSR markers developed can be utilized for various genetic analyses in this species in future.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0469-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.





Discussion

SSR diversity

DNA markers offer more accurate information on genetic diversity, as they are rarely influenced by environmental factors of a region (Sharma et al. 2008). Furthermore, SSR markers specifically possess many desirable useful properties which makes them most preffered DNA markers (Powell et al. 1996; Rana et al. 2015; Sharma et al. 2015). The newly developed SSR markers appeared valuable in detecting diversity in studied germplasm of T. terrestris. Twenty SSR primers generated 2.4 fragments on an average. The less numbers of alleles detected in this study may be attributed to the analyzed populations which were not so apart geographically from each other. In addition, the designed SSRs were from very less sequence data which can be from conserved and stable regions of DNA with regards to mutation rates. Eight SSR primers amplified at least three or more than three fragments and eight primers showed a PIC value greater than 0.4 which is an indicator of high polymorphism. The high genetic diversity and polymorphism observed in present study is in concordance to results of Sarwat et al.. Average PIC value of 0.368 was found higher than obtained in different populations of Valeriana jatamansi and Salvadora oleoides by Jugran et al. and Yadav et al., respectively. However, this mean PIC value was comparable to the values detected in other medicinal plants by various workers (Shaw et al. 2009; Rostami-Ahmadvandi et al. 2013; Tabin et al. 2016). The average number of fragments detected per primer and, PIC and MI values showed that newly developed and characterized marker proved useful in revealing polymorphism in different populations of T. terrestris. The maximum genetic similarity value of 0.870 was observed between Pun-09 from Rajpura and Pun-10 from Patiala showing them the most similar accessions. As these two regions are not very far, high similarity is obvious. It further, indicate that even having cross-pollination and seed dispersal mechanisms, somehow this species is maintaining homozygosity in its populations which requires further investigations. The most diverse accessions were Raj-03 from Jodhpur and Pun-04 from Chhoti Baradari with the minimum similarity value of 0.270. The genetic distantness of these two accessions indicates high diversity in different germplasm prevailing in studied areas.

Cluster analysis and genetic structure

Various clustering methods give the estimate of genetic relatedness of analyzed accessions of a species. Among different clustering tools, the tools based on Baysean methods are considered more robust. Here we used both distance-based and simulation-based Baysean methods for inferring genetic relationships and structure of different T. terrestris populations. Distance-based dendrogram constructed using Jaccards similarity coefficient and UPGMA method grouped all accessions into three groups. Broadly these three groups corresponded to geographical locations of the accessions but group-I which represented majority of accessions from Punjab and group-II which represented majority of accessions from Haryana state, exceptionally included few accessions from other regions. This showed that besides, geographic isolation, different populations of this species are interrelated by some means or mechanisms which is beneficial for enhancing its genetic diversity. One small group (group-III) purely represented accessions from Rajasthan indicating conserved genetic nature of dry region germplasm. Furthermore, as this germplasm is cultivated repeated propagation of same parent germplasm may have lead to its conservative and more homozygous nature. Few exceptional groupings needs further research and analysis. Factorial analysis (Fig. 3) supported the groupings by dendrogram and showed three groups of T. terrestris accessions in which cluster representing Punjab region was having more intermixing of accessions. AMOVA analysis in present study revealed that the major portion of genetic variation resided within different populations of T. terrestris (76 %) rather than among populations (24 %). It points that allele sharing is more frequent within populations than in between populations. Baysean structure analysis indicated two genetic stocks for the entire germplasm included in present study. Cluster-I (Pun-01, Pun-02, Pun-03, Pun-04, Pun-05, Pun-06, Pun-08, Pun-09, Pun-10, Pun-11, Pun-12) belonging to Punjab showed that genetic background of accessions from Punjab was different than the accessions (Raj-01, Raj-02, Raj-03, Raj-04, Raj-05, Raj-06, Har-01, Har-03, Har-04, Har-05 and Har-06) from other two states which clustered in cluster-II. Mean values of Fst for cluster-I and cluster-II were 0.443 and 0.440, respectively, which were much higher than reported by Duran et al. in Creosotebush (Zygophyllaceae: Larrea tridentata) populations and by Fuchs and Hamrick in Guaiacum sanctum (Zygophyllaceae). This showed that genetic differentiation was high in analyzed accessions of T. terrestris than reported in the other members of family. Relative high percentages of pure accessions in both clusters indicate low admixture and natural interbreeding of accession. The reason may be distantness of the accessions included in the study. At K = 3, some of the accessions from the Rajasthan clustered separately and formed a pure cluster representing T. terrestris germplasm from Rajasthan. These observations showed that although there present only two genetic stocks for entire germplasm analyzed in this study, geographical and environmental factors have a great effect in shaping the populations of T. terrestris.

Implications for conservation and management

In the era of higher productivity and food security, many other plant species are being neglected, as the main land is used for cultivation of major crops and remaining lands are coming under various developmental processes. T. terrestris is one such plant which is frequently uprooted to replace major crops thus shrinking in minor patches. Sarwat et al. has already suggested for the conservation of diverse germplasm of this species. Furthermore, Mohammed et al. has included T. terrestris in the list of underutilized medicinal plants of Indian thar desert and suggested its commercial cultivation in this region. Although, its cultivation in dry areas can be taken as a conservation measure but duplication of same germplasm over the years can not ensure preservation of high genetic diversity in it. Further, duplicated germplasm thought to be less stable against any epidemic and therefore is not considered good in view of long-term usage and sustainable utilization. Although, high genetic diversity reported in T. terrestris here showed occurrence of valuable diverse germplasm in north India, continued negligence in some regions especially Punjab and Haryana can lead to loss of important germplasm lines. Thus, it needs attention towards conservation and introduction of diverse lines from fertile to dry regions where it is cultivated extensively to enhance genetic diversity and to ensure its conservation. To achieve this, it is suggested that introduction of various populations of T. terrestris from fertile parts of north India i.e. Punjab and Haryana should be done in north western dry parts of Rajasthan. This can result in conservation of diverse germplasm lines. Further, the demand of this herb in pharmaceutical industries will remain increasing in future, therefore, the abundantly existing resources of this species in north western dry regions needs to be utilized in a well planned way so that the industries relying on raw materials do not face any scarcity in coming years. Thus, by introducing diverse populations in north western parts will create ex situ conservatories for this species. In addition, utilization of existing resources of both fertile and dry regions in a planned manner can assure uninterrupted supply of this species to industries and its conservation for future.
