


Introduction

Stripe rust caused by Puccinia striiformis is one of the major biotic constraints of wheat production in areas where the cool temperature prevails and affects the grain yield, quality and nutrition. Stripe rust is one of the most important diseases that can cause tremendous losses in wheat production worldwide (Stubbs 1988). Stripe rust can cause yield losses up to 10–70 % and in some cases as high as 100 % yield loss, if the infection occurs at a very early stage and continues to the later stage of the plants (Syed et al. 2007). Major wheat producing area in India fall under North Western Plains Zone (NWPZ) along with the strategic area of wheat cultivation under Northern Hills Zone (NHZ). The disease can be controlled by the use of chemicals, although this method is neither cost effective nor environmentally safe (Rosewarne et al. 2013). Other important effective strategy to control disease is the use of resistant cultivars and the deployment of resistance gene in high yielding varieties. Resistance could be either race specific or non-race specific. Race-specific, also called vertical/seedling/non-durable type of resistances often when deployed is effective only for short-time period (4–5 years). Generally, it is overcome by the new races of pathogen because of constant evolution/selection of races in the nature. On the other hand, non-race-specific resistance (horizontal/partial/slow-rusting/durable or adult plant resistances) shows pleiotropic effect is hard to match by the pathogen and can combat the disease for wide range of pathotypes. A number of such type of slow-rusting genes (showing additive effect) need to be pyramided together to achieve effective genetic control against disease progress in the field. Some of the durable/slow-rusting genes namely Lr34/Yr18, Lr46/Yr29, Lr67/Yr46 and Sr2/Yr30 have been reported and found effective in providing rust resistance at field level (Rosewarne et al. 2012). Therefore, it is necessary to search for new source(s) of resistance to identify durable adult plant effective stripe rust resistance against the evolving pathotypes in bread wheat.

Various molecular markers have been widely used to tag and map resistance genes in wheat; however, simple sequence repeat (SSR) has emerged as the choice of marker in gene mapping studies. The development of GBS molecular marker technology that leads to an easy genotyping of large complex genome size such as wheat results in production of detailed genetic map. High throughput markers are not well integrated into the maps, which is the major problem regarding its usage. So, with the help of SSR markers it is easy to locate the positions of different marker types (SNP and DArT) and can build consensus maps between different marker systems. Numerous QTLs (over 140) for resistance to stripe rust in wheat have been reported and through mapping of flanking markers on consensus maps, 49 chromosomal regions have been identified (Rosewarne et al. 2013).

Cappelle–Desprez (European cultivar) was first released in France in 1946 (Lupton and Macer 1962; Worland and Law 1986; Bonjean et al. 2001). It contains seedling resistance genes Yr3a and Yr4a (De Vallavieille-Pope et al. 1990), but presence of APR against stripe rust in this cultivar is less reported. Cappelle–Desprez maintained a high level of resistance so that it is still recognized as a good source of APR in many European countries.

The objective of the present study was to identify genomic regions controlling adult plant resistance (APR) to stripe rust in recombinant inbred line (RIL) population developed from the cross of ‘Cappelle–Desprez’ (resistant) with ‘PBW343’ (susceptible) parents.


