
Abstract

A MYB transcription factor gene, RsMYB1, from radish was introduced into the chrysanthemum cultivars ‘Peach ND’, ‘Peach Red’, and ‘Vivid Scarlet’ under the control of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S promoter. Presence of RsMYB1 in transgenic lines was confirmed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Results of reverse-transcription-PCR analysis revealed that the expression of RsMYB1 was stable in all transgenic lines and could enhance the expression levels of three key biosynthetic genes (F3H, DFR, and ANS) involved in anthocyanin production. Accordingly, anthocyanin content was significantly higher in transgenic lines than in control of all the cultivars, although the increasement was not visually observed in any of the transgenic lines. Therefore, these results demonstrate that RsMYB1 has potential to enhance anthocyanin content in the chrysanthemums.



Introduction

Chrysanthemum morifolium Ramat. is one of the most important floricultural crops that occupies a prominent position in flower markets worldwide. In 2012, its cultivation area was 31 % of the total cut-flower cultivation area (1724 ha) in Korea (Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Rural Affairs, 2012), and it has been increasing on a yearly basis. In summer, the heat stress due to elevated temperatures causes degradation of anthocyanin accumulation in flower petals, leading to low flower quality that causes economic loss in chrysanthemum fields (Eun et al. 2008).

Temperature has been considered as an important factor that influences anthocyanin biosynthesis in various plants, such as apple (Ubi et al. 2006; Lin-Wang et al. 2011), grape (Yamane et al. 2006), petunia (Shvarts et al. 1997), red orange (Lo Piero et al. 2005), and rose (Dela et al. 2003). Elevated temperatures decrease the accumulation of anthocyanin. Huh et al. claimed that flower coloration was observed in red chrysanthemum cultivars when they were grown at an elevated temperature (35 °C).

Genetic engineering with MYB transcription factors has been used to enhance anthocyanin accumulation in several plant species, since MYB transcription factors up-regulated anthocyanin biosynthesis in tobacco, petunia, apple, rose, and lily (Espley et al. 2007; Lin-Wang et al. 2010; Pattanaik et al. 2010; Quattrocchio et al. 2006; Yamagishi et al. 2010). Pattanaik et al. reported that overexpression of MYB (NtAn2) in tobacco enhanced anthocyanin accumulation and expression levels of chalcone synthase (CHS), chalcone isomerase (CHI), flavanone 3-hydroxylase (F3H), dihydroflavonol 4-reductase (DFR), and anthocyanidin synthase (ANS) genes. In apples, red fruit color is controlled by MdMYB10 (Espley et al. 2007). The purple phenotype of sweet potato is also strongly associated with IbMYB1, which induces all anthocyanin biosynthetic genes (Mano et al. 2007). LhMYB6 and LhMYB12 increase the expression levels of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes and determine the accumulation of anthocyanin (Yamagishi et al. 2010). Radish MYB transcription factor belongs to the R2R3-MYB transcription factor family and is highly expressed in the skin and flesh of three radish cultivars (‘Seo Ho’, ‘Man Tang Hong’, and ‘Hong Feng No.1’); strong anthocyanin accumulation has been observed in the radish cultivars (Park et al. 2011). Expression of the MYB transcription factor in petunia enhanced the expression level of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes (CHI, CHS, F3H, DFR, and ANS) as well as anthocyanin accumulation in our previous studies. Since the main anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway in chrysanthemum is the cyanidin-based pathway, CHS, CHI, F3H, DFR, and ANS are considered as the five key biosynthetic genes responsible for anthocyanin accumulation in chrysanthemums. Thus, it is quite interesting to investigate the role of RsMYB1 in anthocyanin accumulation in chrysanthemum.

In this study, we used three different red chrysanthemum cultivars that have been observed to show coloration in summer. RsMYB1 was introduced into the cultivars by using Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Expression levels of anthocyanin biosynthetic genes regulated by RsMYB and associated anthocyanin accumulation were analyzed.



Discussion

Transcription factors can regulate genes involved in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway in various plants, including model plants and floricultural or food crops (Nishihara and Nakatsuka 2011). R2R3 MYB transcription factors, which regulate anthocyanin biosynthesis, cloned from petunia (Quattrocchio et al. 2006), apple, strawberry, plum and rose (Lin-Wang et al. 2010), lily (Yamagishi et al. 2010), snapdragon (Jackson et al. 1991), morning glory (Morita et al. 2006), gentian (Nakatsuka et al. 2008) and tobacco (Pattanaik et al. 2010) have been shown to regulate sets of genes in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway. Therefore, we assumed that it is possible to use the radish RsMYB1 transcription factor, which belongs to the R2R3-MYB transcription factor family and was found to be highly expressed in the skin and flesh of three radish cultivars and responsible for anthocyanin accumulation (Park et al. 2011), to enhance anthocyanin biosynthesis in the chrysanthemum cultivars ‘Peach ND’, ‘Peach Red’, and ‘Vivid Scarlet’, which showed anthocyanin degradation under elevated temperatures.

Here, we produced two individual transgenic lines from each cultivar. However, not all shoots that showed positive results for the introduced RsMYB1 exhibited anthocyanin-enhancing phenotypes. Butaye et al. claimed that this type of variation among individual transgenic plants/genotypes is often observed in plant transformation experiments and can be explained by variation in the expression of the introduced RsMYB1. Analysis of RsMYB1 expression in the transgenic lines was shown to be stable using RT-PCR; this was not consistent with the claim of Butaye et al..

In addition, many researchers have documented that anthocyanin accumulation in chrysanthemum correlated with the expression pattern of biosynthetic genes (Chen et al. 2012; He et al. 2013; Sung et al. 2013). Since the main anthocyanin biosynthesis pathway in chrysanthemum is the cyanidin-based pathway (He et al. 2013), CHS, CHI, F3H, DFR, and ANS are considered as five key biosynthetic genes responsible for anthocyanin accumulation in chrysanthemum. Our results show that the expression of RsMYB1 in chrysanthemum could enhance the expression level of key biosynthetic genes (F3H, DFR, and ANS), although anthocyanin accumulation is not visible in the cultivars. However, analysis of anthocyanin content using a spectrophotometer revealed that anthocyanin contents in transgenic lines of the cultivars were significantly higher than those in the controls. Thus, anthocyanin accumulation in the cultivars was correlated with the expression pattern of biosynthetic genes as reported by the researchers (Chen et al. 2012; He et al. 2013; Sung et al. 2013), but anthocyanin content produced by RsMYB1 seemed to be genotype-dependent because enhancement of anthocyanin contents in cultivars ‘Peach ND’ and ‘Vivid Scarlet’ seemed to be higher than that in cultivar ‘Peach Red’ (Fig. 5). Quattrocchio et al. claimed that although MYB transcription factors could enhance anthocyanin production, different pigmentation control activities were observed in different species of Antirrhinum and Petunia. Moreover, different pigmentation effects of MYB transcription factors on berry skin color in grape (Kobayashi et al. 2004, 2005) and tuber color in potato (De Jong et al. 2004) have also been reported. There seems to be some variation in the ability of transcription factors to control anthocyanin production in different genotypes.

Color pigmentation in petunia due to RsMYB1 was visually shown in our preliminary experiment (data not shown). In addition, enhancement of anthocyanin contents in the cultivars by RsMYB1 was observed in this study. However, the reason why increased anthocyanin content was not visually observed in the cultivars is unclear. One possible explanation is that anthocyanin contents induced by RsMYB1 was not dramatic in these cultivars. Another possible explanation is that the expression levels of F3H, DFR, and ANS were not high enough to enhance high anthocyanin content. Otherwise, it might be that expression of MYB transcription factor alone is not able to enhance strong anthocyanin accumulation in chrysanthemum, because the expression of MYB transcription factor alone failed to express anthocyanin in Arabidopsis and tobacco (Lloyd et al. 1992), and grape (Hichri et al. 2011). Alternatively, it also might be due to lack of basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) expression in the chrysanthemums because, in several other cases, co-expression of MYB transcription factor and a bHLH partner are required to strongly express anthocyanin (Butelli et al. 2008; Lloyd et al. 1992; Quattrocchio et al. 1998). Therefore, we will conduct further experiments to reveal the reason why increased anthocyanin was not visually observed in the transgenic chrysanthemums expressing RsMYB1.
