
Abstract

This paper reports an isolation and identification of novel poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) degrading bacterium Stenotrophomonas sp. RZS 7 and studies on its extracellular PHB degrading depolymerase enzyme. The bacterium isolated from soil samples of plastic contaminated sites of municipal area in Shahada, Maharashtra, Western India. It was identified as Stenotrophomonas sp. RZS 7 based on polyphasic approach. The bacterium grew well in minimal salt medium (MSM) and produced a zone (4.2 mm) of PHB hydrolysis on MSM containing PHB as the only source of nutrient. An optimum yield of enzyme was obtained on the fifth day of incubation at 37 °C and at pH 6.0. Further increase in enzyme production was recorded with Ca2+ ions, while other metal ions like Fe2+ (1 mM) and chemical viz. mercaptoethanol severally affected the production of enzyme.



Introduction

Synthetic plastics create toxic pollution and many health hazards at every stage of their existence, i.e., right from their manufacturing, uses, recycling to the discarding. After their disposal, these synthetic plastics accumulate in the environment as recalcitrant. These environmental, health, and waste management concerns have led to the search of natural, safer, biodegradable, and an eco-friendly alternative to the hazardous synthetic polymers. In this regard, poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) have attracted commercial and research interest as a new biodegradable thermoplastic. PHB is accumulated as intracellular food storage by wide variety of microorganism under carbon rich growth conditions and is mobilized during nutrient starvation period under the influence of an enzyme PHB depolymerase (Klingbeil et al. 1996; Nojima 1996). PHB depolymerases hydrolyze PHB as a substrate and form monomers or dimers that serve as nutrients (Nakayama et al. 1985). The ability of microorganisms to degrade polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) or PHB has been recorded from wide variety of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria (Bradl and Puchner 1992; Mergaert et al. 1993, 1994, 1995) found in soil, compost, sewage etc. Since PHB has been widely accepted as biodegradable polymer, it is necessary to evaluate its biodegradation, the role of polymer-degrading microorganisms, factors affecting the activity of PHB degradation and kinetics of PHB degrading enzyme.


