
Abstract

Over the last two decades, an impressive progress has been made in the identification of novel factors in the translocation machineries of the mitochondrial protein import and their possible roles. The role of lipids and possible protein–lipids interactions remains a relatively unexplored territory. Investigating the role of potential lipid-binding regions in the sub-units of the mitochondrial motor might help to shed some more light in our understanding of protein–lipid interactions mechanistically. Bioinformatics results seem to indicate multiple potential lipid-binding regions in each of the sub-units. The subsequent characterization of some of those regions in silico provides insight into the mechanistic functioning of this intriguing and essential part of the protein translocation machinery. Details about the way the regions interact with phospholipids were found by the use of Monte Carlo simulations. For example, Pam18 contains one possible transmembrane region and two tilted surface bound conformations upon interaction with phospholipids. The results demonstrate that the presented bioinformatics approach might be useful in an attempt to expand the knowledge of the possible role of protein–lipid interactions in the mitochondrial protein translocation process.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0310-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Over the last three decades, multiple types of translocation machineries have been identified in cells (Bohnsack and Schleiff 2010). A motor protein or motor protein machine seems to play a central role in each of those translocation systems. For example in the Sec machinery, the system that facilitates the translocation across and into the prokaryotic membrane is SecA (Vrontou and Economou 2004). While across an endoplasmic reticulum membrane and a mitochondrial membrane, the identified motor proteins are BiP and mtHsp70, respectively (Tomkiewicz et al. 2007). There are, however, important differences in the way of operation. In the Sec system, the motor function is performed by one protein, i.e., SecA (Papanikolau et al. 2007) while in the mitochondrial protein import machinery mtHsp70 is one of the subunits of the matrix import motor (Kang et al. 1990). The identification of other sub-units like Pam18 (D’Silva et al. 2003; Mokranjac et al. 2003; Truscott et al. 2003) substantially increased the understanding of the presequence translocase-associated motor (PAM) of the mitochondrial inner membrane. Recently, new interesting details have been identified regarding the dynamic exchange of Pam18, one of the subunits of the motor-dependent mitochondrial protein translocation, at the motor (Schulz and Rehling 2014).

SecA is one of the best studied proteins in the field of protein translocation. It has not only been identified as a protein that is an essential part of the Sec system (Cabelli et al. 1988) with a well-regulated ATPase activity (Lill et al. 1990) but was also recognized as the protein translocation motor protein in the Sec protein translocation machinery as well (see Vrontou and Economou 2004 for a review). It has been demonstrated that SecA can not only bind but also insert into anionic phospholipid containing membranes (Ulbrandt et al. 1992; Keller et al. 1995). In terms of a mechanistic understanding of these observations, it is interesting to note that a number of possible lipid-binding regions in SecA have been identified (Keller 2011a).

In the same report, multiple lipid-binding regions were found for mtHsp70 (Keller 2011a), a protein with ATPase activity involved in the mitochondrial protein import (Schneider et al. 1996). So at least one component of the protein import motor in the mitochondrial protein translocation machinery exhibits potential lipid-binding regions, just like in SecA (Keller 2011a). Tim44 is a peripheral membrane protein that is able to bind to anionic phospholipids (Weiss et al. 1999). It has been demonstrated that a region in the N-terminal part of the C-terminal domain of this protein is involved in the membrane binding of Tim44 (Marom et al. 2009). Pam18 and Pam16 also known as Tim14 and Tim16 have been studied in great detail (see for example Mokranjac et al. 2006) and it has been suggested that Pam18 contains a transmembrane helix while the closely related Pam16 contains a hydrophobic N-terminus instead. Additionally, a recent report with interesting new details regarding the motor-dependent mitochondrial protein translocation (Schulz and Rehling 2014) triggered the question whether in Pam18 and other subunits of the mitochondrial import motor (novel) helical potential lipid-binding regions can be identified similarly as for mtHsp70. Furthermore, for some of the subunits of the protein import motor, an attempt will be made to give an in-depth in silico characterization of a number of the lipid-binding regions identified. The results will be discussed in terms of the mechanistic implications of our understanding of the functioning of the import motor and the possible role of protein–lipid interactions in this functioning.


