
Abstract

The specific effect of chemical and physical factors on amidase production from Geobacillus subterraneus RL-2a was investigated using design of experiments (DOE) methodology. The one-factor-at-a-time (OFAT) method was used to study the effects of carbon and nitrogen sources on amidase production. Subsequently, optimal levels of physical parameters and key media components, namely temperature, pH, sucrose, K2HPO4, NaCl, yeast, CaCl2·2H2O and MgSO4·7H2O, were determined using the Taguchi orthogonal array (OA) experimental design (DOE) methodology. Taguchi method based on three levels with a OA layout of L18 (21 × 37) with eight most influential factors on amidase synthesis for the proposed experimental design. Analysis of variance was performed on the obtained results and optimum condition suggested by statistical calculations was tested in a verification test. An increase of 169.56 % in amidase production compared to the unoptimized conditions was observed and the conversion of isonicotinamide was significantly improved after performing optimization techniques, including OFAT and Taguchi method. The result indicated that Taguchi method was effective in optimizing the culture conditions of amidase production.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0390-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Amidase, an amide hydrolyzing enzyme, is a member of nitrilase super family and has a great potential for the transformation of amides to corresponding acids and ammonia. Amidase activity has been described in many members of bacterial kingdom including Arthrobacter (Fournand and Arnand 2001), Bacillus (Kim and Oriel 2000), Geobacillus (Makhongela et al. 2007), Microbacterium (Doran et al. 2005), Pseudomonas (Egorova et al. 2004) and Rhodococcus (Trott et al. 2002).

Amidases are one of the most extensively used amide-hydrolysing enzymes in industry due to their enantio/stereoselective properties and capacity for the large-scale production of optically pure organic acids such as p-aminobenzoic acid, nicotinic acid and acrylic acid (Banerjee et al. 2002; Hirrlinger et al. 1996; Wang et al. 2005).

Isonicotinic acid or pyridine-4-carboxylic acid is an important pyridine derivative which is mainly used for the synthesis of isoniazid (an antituberculastic drug), inabenfide (a plant growth regulator), terefenadine (an antihistamine) and nialamide (an antidepressant) (Yadav et al. 2005; Scriven et al. 1998). The chemical processes that are used for the manufacturing of isonicotinic acid are hazardous, energy-demanding and expensive (Yadav et al. 2005). The isonicotinamide can be converted to isonicotinic acid by amidase enzyme as per reaction scheme given below:To date, however, there are very scanty reports on isonicotinamide hydrolysis to produce isonicotinic acid by thermophilic bacterium (Egorova et al. 2004; d’Abusco et al. 2001).

In the conventional one-factor-at-a-time method for optimizing fermentation medium conditions (i.e. nutrients, temperature, pH, etc.), one independent variable is changed while all others are held at definite levels. This one-dimensional evaluation is tedious and time-consuming and requires more experiments and cannot provide information about the mutual interactions of the parameters.

On the other extreme, there are full-factorial experimental designs that consider all variables and their interactions at once. But this dedicates huge numbers of trials, which have to be done, most probably beyond the time and budget capabilities. As a solution, fractional factorial experimental designs, including Placket–Burman design, orthogonal array and response surface methodology (RSM) designs have been introduced, reducing the number of the tests while giving reliable results (Greasham and Inamine 1986; Strobel and Sulivan 1999; Xu et al. 2003).

The concept of design of experiments (DOE) makes the optimization easy, helps in building the models, evaluating the effect of several factors, achieving the optimum conditions for desirable responses and also reduced the number of experiments to large extent (Montgomery 2005). This methodology is applied in many engineering areas and is extensively used to design robust products and processes for industry. Its application in the biotechnology field, in particular in fermentation processes, has also proven to be useful (Rao et al. 2008).

The purpose of this study was to optimize culture condition to improve amidase production by G. subterraneus RL-2a using one-factor-at-a-time and a statistics-based orthogonal array designs. At first, the effects of different medium, carbon and nitrogen sources on amidase production were investigated by one-factor-at-a-time. Then, the concentration of medium components was optimized using taguchi method as a fractional factorial design.


