
Abstract

Marine bacteria are known to produce many bioactive molecules and extracellular enzymes of commercial importance. We have investigated the bacterial diversity of the coastal area of Karwar, Karnataka State, India. Among these bacterial isolates, five bacterial strains were selected and identified by their morphological, biochemical characteristics and phylogenetic analysis based on 16S rRNA gene sequences. The identified bacterial isolates, Bacillus toyonensis PNTB1, Lysinibacillus sphaericus PTB, Vibrio vulnificus PMD, Shewanella MPTDBS, and Pseudomonas chlororaphis PNTB were characterized for their tolerance to salt and antibiotics. Vibrio vulnificus PMD showed maximum tolerance at higher concentration of salt than other bacteria. These bacterial strains were screened for the production of extracellular enzymes such as lipase, cellulase, pectinase, tannase, chitinase, and l-glutaminase. Vibrio vulnificus showed maximum production of l-glutaminase enzyme. Bacillus toyonensis PNTB1 shows lipase, CM-cellulase and chitinase activities. These isolated bacterial cultures were also utilized most of the aromatic compounds at 7 mM. These findings indicate the organisms present in this zone may have more potential applications in bioremediation, agricultural, industrial, and therapeutics.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0332-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Marine environment is a source for the isolation of a novel microorganism(s) with the potentiality to produce active secondary metabolites. Among marine organisms, bacteria are of particular interest since they play a vital role in the cycle of matter in water (Rheinheimer 1980). Marine bacteria are well known for their varied bioactive properties, which include the production of secondary metabolites, highly thermostable enzymes and bioactive compounds (Ashadevi et al. 2008). So, it is important to determine the types of bacteria present in the marine ecosystem, the role they play in the functioning of that ecosystem (Nazia and Nuzhat 2006). Hence, in the present study an attempt has been made to isolate and biochemically characterize some of the important marine bacteria from coastal area of Karwar (Karnataka State, India), with a view to identify the organisms and to study their salt tolerance, maximum tolerable concentration of antibiotics, utilization of various aromatic compounds as a growth substrate and also to evaluate their enzyme production potentials. There are reports on the study of marine bacterial diversity from different coastal area of sea (Chiaki et al. 1985; Bozal et al. 2002; Zamudio-Maya et al. 2008; Bal et al. 2009; Aureen et al. 2010; Aisha and Nuzhat 2011). There are very few reports on microorganisms which were isolated from coastal area of Karwar (Pankaj et al. 2011, 2013; Sanjay Kumar and Nagappa 2011; Shreedevi and Rathod 2011). However, there is not much information available on the bacterial cultures isolated from coastal area of Arabian Sea (Karwar, Karnataka State, India) having the ability of producing various extracellular enzymes with maximum tolerance of different antibiotics and salt concentrations and also utilization of various aromatic compounds. Karwar is the coastal city of Arabian Sea and Head Quarters of Uttar Kannada District and is in the West-coast of India, is situated 1315511N latitude and 7.4015–751051E longitude. This place is gained a prominent place in the map of India because of the location of the recently commissioned Indian Naval Base called ‘Sea Bird’ and Kaiga Atomic Power Station in its vicinity. In the present study, we describe the cultural, morphological and biochemical characterization of pure bacterial cultures, isolated from marine sediments, west coastal area of Arabian Sea. Further, they were identified on the basis of 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis. In addition, we also present results of the bacterial cultures having the ability to various extracellular enzyme activities with their maximum tolerance towards various antibiotics and salt concentrations. These pure bacterial cultures were also utilizing various aromatic compounds as a growth substrate.


