
Abstract

Bacterial strains associated with entomopathogenic nematodes (EPNs) Rhabditis (Oscheius) spp. were isolated from infected cadavers of Galleria mellonella. The obtained 18 isolates were subdivided into nine phylogenetically different genera based on comparative sequence analysis of their 16S rRNA genes. The isolates were affiliated to three different class namely γ-proteobacteria (Enterobacter, Proteus, Providencia, Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas), β-proteobacteria (Alcaligenes) and Bacilli (Bacillus, Enterococcus, Lysinibacillus). It was observed that Gram-positive strains (Bacilli) were more frequently associated with the EPN, whereas Gram-negative isolates were affiliated to six different genera with more genotypic diversity. Subsequently, all bacterial isolates used in this study were analyzed by amplified ribosomal DNA restriction analysis (ARDRA). Eight restriction endonucleases (CfoI, HinfI, RsaI, DdeI, Sau3AI, AluI, HaeIII, and MspI) were examined and a total of 15 different genotypes were obtained, forming two heterogenous main clusters after analysis by un-weighted pair-group method using arithmetic averages.





Discussion

The present study describes the molecular characterization of EPB isolated from R. (Oscheius) sp. and based on the 16S rDNA sequence analysis, the 18 isolates were identified as Enterobacter sp., P. mirabilis, Providencia sp., Pseudomonas sp., S. maltophilia (class γ-proteobacteria), A. faecalis (class β-proteobacteria) and B. cereus, E. faecalis, L. sphaeriscus (class Bacilli). The restriction analysis data of PCR-amplified 16S rDNA of the isolates revealed that they came under 15 different genotypes and were grouped into two heterogenous main clusters based on dendrogram.

In the current investigation, the EPB were isolated from EPNs Rhabditis (Oscheius) sp. which belongs to the family Rhabditidae. Zhang et al. and Chaston et al. opined that EPB are usually associated with EPNs of the family Steinernematidae, Heterorhabditidae and Rhabditidae. Gram-negative enterobacteria of the genera Xenorhabdus and Photorhabdus are the most studied mutualistic symbionts of the EPNs Steinernema and Heterorhabditis (Boemare et al. 1993; Forst and Clarke 2002; Chaston et al. 2011). The molecular and cellular interface between the host and the bacteria during the colonization process is the reason for unique nematode–bacterium association (Goodrich-Blair and Clarke 2007; Snyder et al.2007). The complete genome sequence data of Xenorhabdus and Photorhabdus sp. revealed a set of common genes encoding toxins, proteases, putative membrane transporters, transcriptional regulators and genes encoding lipopolysaccharide production, which help in stabilizing the nematode-bacterium mutualism (Chaston et al. 2011).

The EPB isolated in this study has been reported to have biocontrol activity (Deepa et al. 2010; Mohandas et al. 2007). Many nematode species such as (Rhabditis (Oscheius) sp., Rhabditis blumi, Heterorhabditidoides chongmingensis, Heterorhabditidoides rugaoensis of the family Rhabditidae have association with EPB and together act as potent biological control agent (Zhang et al. 2008, 2012; Park et al. 2012). The insect pathogenic bacteria viz Providencia vermicola, A. faecalis and Flavobacterium sp. isolated from R. blumi have pathogenic effect on major cruciferous vegetable pests such as Plutella xylostella L., Artogeia rapae L., Mamestra brassicae L. (Park et al. 2011, 2012). Out of the 18 strains isolated from the Rhabditis (Oscheius) sp. 11 strains were identified as B. cereus. Associations between endospore forming Paenibacillus nematophilus, and H. megidis have already been reported (Enright et al. 2003). A Bacillus sp. was also reported to have phoretic relationship with the EPN, Heterorhabditis sp. (Marti and Timper 1999). The insecticidal activity of B. cereus by producing insecticidal proteins named Vip during the vegetative phase which in turn causes pathogenicity to insects of order Lepidoptera and Diptera reported by To et al., Kaaya and Darji, Warren et al.. Kumar et al. (2014a) reported antimicrobial property of the metabolites isolated from B. cereus associated with Rhabditis (Oscheius) sp. L. sphaericus is the first report to have its association with IJs of EPN. Although L. sphaeriscus was reported as an entomopathogen and produces toxin like sphaericolysin leading to haemocoelic toxicity toward Blattela germanica and Spodoptera litura (Castagnola and Stock 2014). It was the first report of the bacterium to have its association with IJs of EPN. The 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the isolates TN5 and TAH shared 98 % similarity with E. faecalis (NR 074637 and NR 115765). Walsh and Webster also reported the occurrence of two bacterial species viz. Acinetobacter and Enterococcus from Steinernema in addition to Xenorhabdus symbionts.

The Gram-negative isolates associated with Rhabditis (Oscheius) sp. belong to six different genera of class γ-proteobacteria and β-proteobacteria. Similar studies also reported isolation of Gram-negative EPB of different genera such as Provindencia (proteus) rettgeri (Jackson et al. 1995); Enterobacter gergoviae, Vibrio spp., Pseudomonas fluorescens type C, Serratia marcescens, Citrobacter freundii, and Serratia proteomaculans (Gouge and Snyder 2006) from EPN. Association of γ-proteobacterium Moraxella osloensis (Moraxellaceae) with the nematode Phasmarhabditis hermaphrodita (Rhabditidae) was reported by Tan and Grewal but the bacterium was phylogenetically distinct from either Xenorhabdus or Photorhabdus (Enterobacteriaceae). Symbiotic association of Serratia nematodiphila (Enterobacteriaceae) with a newly described EPN, Heterorhabditidoides chongmingensis which belongs to family Rhabditidae was reported by Zhang et al.. All these studies revealed the association of γ-proteobacteria with EPNs.

Brunel et al. opined that restriction analysis of PCR-amplified 16S rDNA is a very effective technique for distinguishing between the bacterial symbionts of EPNs. Amplified Ribosomal DNA Restriction Analysis (ARDRA) of 16S rDNA was used to distinguish the EPB strains associated with Rhabditis (Oscheius) sp. The isolates BR1, HY, KPG, KY1, KAL, KK2, SBI, and SCI were identified as B. cereus but six different restriction patterns were observed by this method. These results corroborate with the studies on Xenorhabdus and Photorhabdus conducted by Fischer-Le Saux et al.. The isolates TN5 and TAH were identified as E. faecalis, but they also show variable restriction patterns. Detection of new genotypes and grouping of Xenorhabdus and Photorhabdus using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and 16S rDNA were reported by Akhurst and Brunel et al.. All the bacterial isolates used in this study were also grouped into two heterogenous main clusters where group I comprises all the B. cereus, L. sphaericus, E. faecalis, P. mirabilis, Providencia sp. and Enterobacter sp. strains, whereas group II comprises Pseudomonas sp., S. maltophilia and A. faecalis. The clustering of the isolates may be due to the absence of variation in 16S rRNA genes among different bacterial species (Fox et al. 1992). It can also be explained by their shared environment, including a common host, which promoted the exchange of genetic material between the bacterial isolates. Entomopathogens in general have a history of horizontal gene transfer events, shuffling toxin containing plasmids and pathogenicity islands between each other (Castagnola and Stock 2014). The present study also reveals a group of novel EPB which will be useful for production of bioactive metabolites effective against bacterial and fungal diseases of plants and animals.
