
Abstract

The production of new cultivars via recombinant DNA technology is important in applied agriculture. Promoters play fundamental roles in successful transformation and gene expression. Fragments of the upstream regulatory region of the movement protein gene of the Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV; two fragments) and Watermelon chlorotic stunt virus (WmCSV, two fragments) and one fragment of the coat protein putative promoter of TYLCV (CPTY-pro) were isolated to assess their abilities to drive expression in monocot and dicot plants. We used bioinformatic analyses to identify tentative motifs in the fragments. The five promoter fragments were isolated, fused with the GUS reporter gene, and transformed into tomato, watermelon, and rice plantlets via Agrobacterium infiltration. GUS expression driven by each putative promoter was analysed using histochemical and fluorometric analyses. In both dicots and the monocots, the highest level of GUS expression was obtained using a truncated regulatory region from TYLCV (MMPTY-pro) followed by a truncated regulatory region from WmCSV (MMPWm-pro). However, the corresponding full-length fragments from TYLCV and WmCSV showed essentially equivalent expression levels in the fluorometric GUS assay compared with the enhanced Cauliflower mosaic virus e35S-pro. In addition, CPTY-pro showed no expression in either the dicots or the monocot. This study demonstrated that MMPTY-pro and MMPWm-pro may be useful as plant promoters.



Introduction

In the last decades agriculture was considered to be biological machinery. With accumulative information of genetics, plant breeders have enhanced crop quality and yield. In this century recombinant DNA technology facilitated the characterization and isolation of valuable genes that can be introduced into living organisms to obtain new traits with improved qualities.

Gene expression levels and patterns depend on the presence or absence of cis-regulatory elements in their promoter regions. Expression can be monitored experimentally using a reporter gene under control of the putative promoter. Promoters can be constitutive, inducible, or tissue-specific. Some geminivirus promoters are able to drive constitutive gene expression in transgenic plants, while others are subject to regulation. For example, the CP promoter from Tomato golden mosaic virus (TGMV) is active in both phloem and mesophyll cells in the presence of a transcriptional activator protein (TrAP).

Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) is a member of the genus Begomovirus in the family Geminiviridae (Briddon et al. 1996). Its monopartite single-stranded genome encodes five proteins from both the virion (V) and complementary (C) strands: C1, C2, C3, V1, and V2. V1 and V2 are late-expression genes that code for the viral pre-coat and coat (CP) proteins, respectively; V2 expression is transactivated by the C2 protein. C1, or REP, is a replication protein that recognizes the origin sequence (ori) in the viral genome (Laufs et al. 1995). C1 can positively regulate expression by binding to the viral replication enhancer protein, C3 (Settlage et al. 1996; Castillo et al. 2003). C2 is involved in CP expression regulation (Dry et al. 2000) and plays a role in viral systemic spread in plants.

The last open reading frame in the group of early-expression genes is c4-ORF, which encodes a movement protein (MP) that is responsible for viral movement from cell to cell through plasmodesmata. We previously reported that gene was highly expressed (Abu El-Heba et al. 1999), so we decided to isolate and evaluate the expression efficiency of its promoter and compare it with another geminivirus MP promoter and the widely used Cauliflower mosaic virus e35S promoter as a control.

We chose to isolate the MP promoter from the Watermelon chlorotic stunt virus (WmCSV), a bipartite geminivirus (Lecoq et al. 1994; Dafalla et al. 1998; Kheyr-Pour et al. 2000). Segment A of its genome contains the same genes as the TYLCV genome, except the MP BC1, which is incorporated within intergenic region of segment B (Orozco and Hanley-Bowdoin 1996).

In this study, the putative MP promoters of TYLCV (MP-TYLCV) and WmCSV (MP-WmCSV) were tested for their effects on the expression of the β-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene. Agrobacterium infiltration was used to transform dicot and monocot plants with a promoter–GUS construct to monitor promoter activity. Both promoters showed great promise for recombinant protein production.



Discussion

Promoters are regulatory regions that control gene expression in eukaryotes, which require exceptionally precise systems to regulate complex expression patterns involving thousands of genes (McKenna and O’Malley 2002a, b; Narlikar et al. 2002; Orphanides and Reinberg 2002). The promoters of plant viruses have great potential for plant biotechnology to engineer recombinant proteins with higher yields rapidly and at large scales (Pogue et al. 2002). Viruses such as Potato virus X, Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), Alfalfa mosaic virus, Cucumber mosaic virus, and Cowpea mosaic virus have been used as expression vectors to produce recombinant proteins, like vaccine antigens (Donson et al. 1991; Chapman et al. 1992; Yusibov et al. 1997; Lomonossoff and Hamilton 1999; Zhao et al. 2000; Sanchez-Navarro et al. 2001; Pogue et al. 2002; Yusibov and Rabindran 2004).

The more basic knowledge we have on fundamental transcription elements in active promoters, the more efficient in vitro transcription we can perform in the future. Plant promoters that are activated precisely when and where needed would be ideal for genetic engineering. Therefore, the isolation and characterization of new effective functional plant promoters is highly desirable. To advance this goal, five putative promoter regions were isolated from two geminiviruses with bidirectional gene transcription from a stretch of DNA containing the core promoter region.

By comparing the different cis-elements present in each of our putative promoters and the promoters’ quantitative fluorescent GUS assays, we were able to make some valuable observations, which will significantly enhance future research on promoter architectures and activities. MMPTY-pro, which conferred the highest level of GUS expression, had the fewest conserved motifs (26 cis-acting elements), followed by MMPWm-pro. Although CPTY-Pro had the most elements, it did not promote expression. Interestingly, although CPTY-pro is a TATA-less promoter, this fact did not explain its behaviour, this observation is consistent with the observation of Khan et al. 2015) when it has observed a weak activity of CLCuBuV CP promoter which has been explained to probably be due to the absence of AC2 gene product in CLCuBuV (Amrao et al. 2010). The role of transactivator AC2 protein for activation of virion sense promoter which has already been reported (Hong et al. 1996 and Sunter et al. 1990) and may have a great effect on the activity of CP promoter. Gene expression process in geminivirus happens by an early expression of complimentary sense gene, whose products are then participating in viral replication such as AC1 (Rep) or they may act as transcription activator for the virion sense gene expression, such as AC2 (TrAp). In contrast, the expression of virion sense genes usually appears later and requires complimentary sense gene product/products for activation (Ashraf et al. 2014). We have observed that the MMPTY-pro, which had the highest expression levels, was TATA-less like the CP which means that the TATA box had no great effect on the promoter activity in our case.

TATABOXes (TATABOX4, TATABOX5, TATABOXOSPAL) comprised 2 % of e35S-pro, 16 % of MMPWm-pro, 10 % of TMPWm-pro, and 8 % of TMPTY-pro. With TATABOX-dependent core promoters, the transcription factors (TFs) can assemble into a pre-initiation complex in the following order: TFIID, TFIIB, RNA polymerase II-TFIIF complex, TFIIF, and then TFIIH. TFIID consists of TBP (TATA box-binding protein) and about 13 TBP-associated factors (Burley and Roeder 1996; Albright and Tjian 2000; Berk 2000; Verrijzer 2001; Tora 2002), while TFIIB is single polypeptide that interacts with TBP as well as DNA upstream of the TATA box. In TATA-less promoters (e.g. CPTY-pro and MMPTY-pro), DPE is the downstream core promoter binding site of TFIID (Burke and Kadonaga 1996).

Remarkably the brightest blue colour of GUS promoted by MMPTY-pro, the TATA-less promoter, was observed constitutively in vascular bundles, spongy mesophyll, palisade mesophyll, and in the green plastids within palisade cells of tomato leaves. This result agrees with Erb and van Nimwegen, who stated that TATA-less promoters are expressed in a constitutive manner and enriched for house-keeping genes, whereas TATA-containing promoters show variability in expression, and are often induced in response to stress. Our other putative promoters showed different expression patterns within plant tissues. The GUS staining derived from pMMPWm, with the second most intense levels, occurred in mature xylem and phloem, as well as in secondary vascular bundles. This staining was restricted to mature xylem and phloem in pTMPTY, pTMPWm, and pCAMBIA3301.

The activity results proved that the smaller fragments of the promoters were more efficient than their larger corresponding fragments. Comparing both activity level and the cis-acting elements present within the small MMPTY-pro and the large TMPTY-pro, we found that ARR1AT, GT1CONSENSUS, GTGANTG10, ACGTATERD1, WRKY71OS, EECCRCAH1, and ASF1MOTIFCAMV comprised 15, 7, 7, 4, 7, 7, and 4 %, respectively, of MMPTY-pro and 8, 5, 3, 3, 3, 3, and 2 %, respectively, of TMPTY-pro. In the WmCSV promoter fragments, TATABOX5, ARR1AT, CAATBOX1, CACFTPPCA1, ARFAT, and ASF1MOTIFCAMV made up 10, 10, 10, 10, 6, and 6 %, respectively, of the small MMPWm-pro and 8, 8, 8, 8, 4, and 4 %, respectively, of the large TMPWm-pro. Therefore, we postulate that the frequency of some cis-acting elements within the promoter region plays a crucial role in the promoter’s efficiency.

In this study, ARR1AT BOX, which comprised 15 % of MMPTY-pro and 8 % of TMPTY-pro, may have had a positive effect on the promoter’s efficiency. This motif made up 10 % of MMPWm-pro and 8 % of TMPWm-pro. ARR1 belongs to the MYB TF family and is one of seven members in the largest subclass of type-B ARRs (Sakai et al. 2000; Imamura et al. 2003; Tajima et al. 2004; Taniguchi et al. 2007). The MYP TF family is present in all eukaryotes. All members have the N-terminus MYP DNA-binding domain (Nero et al. 2009). ARR1 mediates cytokinin signal responses (Sakai et al. 2000, 2001; Hwang and Sheen 2001). Therefore, increasing the frequency of the ARR1AT BOX within our putative truncated promoters map explain the elevated GUS activity in both of our minor fragment promoters. Because BAP was used as a cytokinin source in all of our tissue cultures, it acted as a positive signal that enhanced the response of the ARR1 DNA-binding domain to the ARR1AT BOX. Consequently, the GUS expression was considerably increased by the truncated putative promoters.

ASF1MOTIFCAMV is another element that made up a greater percentage of the promoter region in both MMPTY-pro (4 %) and MMPWm-pro (6 %) compared with TMPTY-pro (2 %) and TMPWm-pro (4 %), respectively. This motif comprised 4 % of the e35S promoter and reacts with the ASF-1 cellular factor (Lam et al. 1989).

Another element, WRKY71OS, is a member of the W-BOX. WRKY is one of the largest transcriptional regulator families in the plant kingdom and is considered as an essential part of the signalling pathways that moderates many plant processes. WRKYs are proposed to perform a regulatory role in resistance transcriptome amid the W-box element [(C/T)TGAC(C/T] (Eulgem and Somssich 2007), and an enormous number of WRKY genes are up-regulated by pathogen infection (Maleck et al. 2000; Dong et al. 2003; Glazebrook et al. 2003; Kalde et al. 2003; Eulgem and Somssich 2007). Specific WRKY proteins have been proven to regulate plant immune responses. Arabidopsis WRKY52/RRS1 helps in defence against the Ralstonia solanacearum bacterium. Another Arabidopsis WRKY70 acts as a positive regulator of salicylic acid-dependent defence mechanisms (Li et al. 2004, 2006). Therefore, elevating the frequency of WRKY1OS in MMPTY-pro may be another mechanism to enhance GUS expression, because the Agrobacterium that we used to introduce our constructs into the explants is considered to be a biotic stress that can induce the WRKY TFs to initiate immune signalling cascades by binding to their proper element, in this case WRKY1OS.

In contrast, our analysis found that MYBCORATCYCB, MYCCONSESUSAT, MYB2CONSENSHSA MYBCORE, POLLEN1LELAT52, SEF1MOTIF, LEAFYATAG, LECPLEACS2, and POLASIG2 had been completely deleted from MMPTY-pro, while MYCCONSESUSAT, POLLEN1LELAT52, POLASIG1, GTGANTG10, and GT1CONSENSUS had been completely deleted from MMPWm-pro, although they were present in the longer versions of these promoters. This result suggested that the deletion of some elements could decrease the competition of different TFs for their specific elements within the promoter region.

The five conserved domains ARR1AT, CAATBOX1, ACGTATERD1, GATABOX, and DOFCOREZM were common in all of our putative promoters and in the 35S promoter. CAATBOX1 occupies a considerable proportion of our putative promoter fragments: 10 % in MMWm-pro, 9 % in CPTY-pro, 8 % in TMPWm-pro and TMPTY-pro, 7 % in MMPTY-pro, and finally 5 % within e35S. This motif is responsible for the tissue-specific promotion of the pea legumin gene LegA (Shirsat et al. 1989) and occurs within the pvPDF promoter. The ACGTATERD1 domain is required for etiolation-induced expression of erd1 (early response to dehydration) in Arabidopsis. GATABOXes are required for high-level light-regulated and tissue-specific gene expression. GATA TFs are a group of DNA-binding proteins distinguished by a zinc finger motif that have been implicated in light- and nitrate-dependent transcription control (Reyes et al. 2004). GATA TFs are reported to bind the CaMV 35S promoter and are conserved in cab promoters as well (Lam et al. 1989). DOFCOREZM is the target binding site of Dof proteins, which are specific DNA-binding proteins associated with the expression of multiple genes in plants. Dof proteins also differentially regulate diverse promoters in a variety of plant tissues (Yanagisawa and Schmidt 1999).

Gene expression, and thus protein biosynthesis, does not depend only on the presence of functional cis-elements, but also on how and when the trans-acting elements interact with their proper elements and also on the activity of RNA polymerase II. The transcriptome activation of CPTY-pro is mediated by transactivation of the C2, which might explain the silent expression of this putative promoter.
