
Abstract

Efficiency of cellulase-free xylanases is one of the determining factors in paper and pulp industries. Use of microbes which can produce cellulase-free xylanases may help to overcome the current challenges in kraft pulp processing. Isolation and screening of microorganisms from local samples offers a possibility for obtaining the potential microbes for this purpose. This research was therefore aimed to collect, screen, characterize and identify potential cellulase-free xylanase producers. A total of 313 microbial isolates were collected while using selective media (EBAM and XAM) to determine the xylanolytic potential of microbes. Qualitative and quantitative analyses were performed and finally 11 bacterial and 6 fungal strains were selected for characterization and identification. The potential isolates were identified as Bacillus pumilus (388.82 U/mg), Bacillus safensis (385.26 U/mg), Aspergillus flavus (493.33 U/mg) and Aspergillus niger (419.33 U/mg). Optimization of the microbial strains while using agro-industrial waste is suggested.



Introduction

Xylanases are of great importance in a number of industrial processes and the increasing trend towards an environment friendly industrialization has paved its ways. Hemicelluloses, being the second most abundant component of plant biomass tend to be suitable agro-industrial residue (Collins et al. 2005). 20–35 % of the total dry mass of plants constitutes xylans which are useful as fermentation substrate for the production of sugars and biofuel (Haltrich et al. 1996; Filho 1998). Xylans are heterogeneous compounds and require synergistic reaction of hydrolytic enzymes for their complete degradation. Among these enzymes, endo-β-1,4-xylanases (EC.3.2.1.8) are the most important xylanolytic enzymes which cleave off the internal glycosidic bonds in xylan backbone, reducing the degree of polymerization (Biely 1985; Polizeli et al. 2005). The cleavage carried out by these enzymes is very specific and the degree of substitution in the polymer affects the hydrolysis product (Dodd and Cann 2009).Interest in the xylanolytic enzymes has received much attention due to their potential uses in different industrial processes such as kraft pulp bleaching, biopulping in paper and pulp industry, in animal feed stock, bread and beverages (Kirk and Yang 1979; Schwien and Schmidt 1982; Viikari et al. 1986; Madlala et al. 2001).

Some marine algae are also reported to secrete xylanases in extracellular environment (Polizeli et al. 2005). Xylanases of protozoan and crustacean origin are also reported (Devillard et al. 1999; Polizeli et al. 2005). Unusual xylanases from the gut of insects have been studied (Roy et al. 2003; Brennan et al. 2004). Wu and He have recently reported isolation of a xylanolytic strain Cellvibrio mixtus from giant snail in Singapore whereas similar reports of xylanases from fresh water mollusc have been noted from Yamura (Yamura et al. 1997). Many microbial sources including bacteria, fungi and yeast are being reported with tolerable temperature and pH ranges (Sunna and Antranikian 1997). Filamentous fungi, especially from Aspergillus and Trichoderma spp. are reported to be the best sources of xylanases with higher levels of extracellular xylanase production (Haltrich et al. 1996).

To contribute in the improvement of biodegradation of hemicelluloses through microbial co-cultures, exploration, selection and characterization of potential cellulase-free xylanase producing microbes may have important roles. The production of cellulase-free xylanase is of crucial importance in paper and pulp industry. Thus, the objective of the present study was to collect, screen, identify and characterize cellulase-free xylanase producing locally isolated microbial strains.


