
Abstract

Despite the extensive use of small millet landraces as an important source of nutrition for people living in semi-arid regions, they are presently marginalized and their diversity and distribution are threatened at a global scale. Local farmers have developed ancient breeding programs entrenched in traditional knowledge (TK) that has sustained rural cultures for thousands of years. The convention on biological diversity seeks fair and equitable sharing of genetic resources arising from local knowledge and requires signatory nations to provide appropriate policy and legal framework to farmers’ rights over plant genetic resources and associated TK. DNA barcoding employed in this study is proposed as a model for conservation of genetic diversity and an essential step towards documenting and protecting farmers’ rights and TK. Our study focuses on 32 landraces of small millets that are still used by indigenous farmers located in the rain fed areas of rural India and Nepal. Traditional knowledge of traits and utility was gathered using participatory methods and semi-structured interviews with key informants. DNA was extracted and sequenced (rbcL, trnH-psbA and ITS2) from 160 samples. Both multivariate analysis of traits and phylogenetic analyses were used to assess diversity among small millet landraces. Our research revealed considerable variation in traits and DNA sequences among the 32 small millet landraces. We utilized a tiered approach using ITS2 DNA barcode to make 100 % accurate landrace (32 landraces) and species (six species) assignments for all 160 blind samples in our study. We have also recorded precious TK of nutritional value, ecological and agricultural traits used by local farmers for each of these traditional landraces. This research demonstrates the potential of DNA barcoding as a reliable identification tool and for use in evaluating and conserving genetic diversity of small millets. We suggest ways in which DNA barcodes could be used in the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights in India and Nepal.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0450-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Cultivated for centuries, millets are an important source of human food in semi-arid regions of Asia and Africa. In present day India, pearl millet and sorghum are the two major millets that undergo large-scale cultivation with commercial implications at the global level (Rai et al. 1999; Gruère et al. 2009). Unfortunately, traditional landraces of small millets have been marginalized and their distribution is threatened. Small millets are equally important as major millets, but there is a lesser known group of six species that compromise thousands of traditional landraces (Nagarajan and Smale 2007; Gruère et al. 2009). The six different species of small millets cultivated by farmers in India are as follows: little millet (Panicum sumatrense Roth ex Roem. & Schult.), proso millet (Panicum miliaceum L.), Italian millet (Setaria italica (L.) P. Beauv.), kodo millet (Paspalum scrobiculatum L.), Indian barnyard millet (Echinochloa frumentacea Link.), and finger millet (Eleusine coracana (L.) Gaertn.) (Newmaster et al. 2013a, b, c). Compared to pearl millet and sorghum, these millets have shorter slender culms and smaller grain size (Maloles et al. 2011). In Nepal, finger millet (Elusine coracana) is one of the commonly grown millets and an important staple crop in the hill and mountain farming systems, especially in the rainfed and marginal agricultural lands. The total area under finger millet cultivation was 268 thousand hectares with a national average productivity of 1.11 mt/ha in 2009/2010. It occupies nine percent of total cultivable land and around 75 % of finger millet cultivation areas located in the mid hills (Upreti 2002). Foxtail millet (Setaria italica), barnyard millet (Echinochloa frumentacea Link.), little millet (Panicum miliare) and proso millet (Panicum miliaceum) are other small millets grown in Nepal. Apart from the morphological differences, it is the incredible underutilization of small millets that distinguishes them from the major millets. Although these landraces have considerable utility for farmers, these “small” millets have received relatively low market and research support for enhancing crop area, production, improvement and utilization (Nagarajan and Smale 2007).

Despite having very little commercial development, small millets are grown extensively by indigenous farmers in rural southern India for their nutritious content and resistance to drought (Maloles et al. 2011). Farmers have selected for specific ecological/agricultural traits in small millet landraces that have allowed them to cultivate these crops in marginal regions (Weber 1998). This ancient breeding program is entrenched in traditional knowledge (TK) that has sustained cultures such as the Malayali farming communities in the Eastern Ghats (of India) for thousands of years (Rengalakshmi 2005). This traditional knowledge classifies traits into three broad categories: morphological traits (plant height, seed shape, size, etc.), agricultural traits (grain yield, drought tolerance, etc.), and traits that have cultural value (gastronomic and medicinal traits) to the farmers (Newmaster et al. 2013a, b, c). Using quantitative morphometric analysis, Maloles et al. show that the Malayali TK classification is hierarchical and recognizes considerable fine scale variation in millet landraces with high consensus among farmers (Rengalakshmi 2005; Maloles et al. 2011). The TK classification is multi-tiered with a primary tier that represents five species and a secondary tier that classifies the 19 different landraces (Maloles et al. 2011). By selecting for traits that are beneficial for livelihood, farmers inadvertently imposed considerable selection pressures on the genome of small millet landraces. Traits notified millets were retained by farmers for long time—several ages, especially for their own needs and cultural value.

Both India and Nepal are parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which has three main objectives: the conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resources. CBD envisaged that the benefits accruing from commercial use of traditional knowledge have to be shared with the people responsible for creating, refining and using this knowledge. The Article 8 (j) of the CBD provides for respecting, protecting and rewarding the Knowledge, Innovations and Practices (KIP) of local communities (Patel 2004). Although the development of an appropriate form of protection for the knowledge of local farming communities is of great interest to the developing countries including India and Nepal, there have been minimal steps in systematic documentation and analysis of indigenous knowledge of farmers. Nepal has recently started streamlining the conservation of biodiversity by putting up the Agriculture Genetic Resource Centre (Genebank) (http://narc.gov.np/org/gene_bank.php) under the government owned Nepal Agricultural Research Council (NARC). The conservation strategies followed are the ex situ conservation, on-farm conservation and in situ conservation. However, a systematic recording and documentation of DNA database is still a long journey. The PPVFR Act in India has set the tone for farmers’ ownership over plant genetic resources (Swaminathan 2002). The implementation of the PPVFR Act has led to creation of the authority that registers local landraces of different cultivated species conserved by the farmers and communities, which will facilitate their claims for benefit sharing and recognition. The next important step is to document genetic diversity using a common method. India seems to be a step ahead compared to Nepal, yet does not have a National DNA database for Indian plant species or landraces. The researchers rely on the allele frequency calculations on the western species/landraces through blast analysis of the NCBI GenBank database. The lack of any genetic database precludes the protection of plant varieties and farmers’ rights in these countries. The paper illustrates that how DNA barcoding can be used as a tool for classifying genetics and commodity identification tool can ensure authentication and traceability of landraces. This could provide a DNA-based model for conservation of genetic diversity and the associated biocultural diversity of millet landraces still used and shared among rural communities.

DNA barcoding has been shown to be an effective tool for plant identification. Plant barcoding utilizes a multiregional approach using multiple DNA regions to identify plants (Chase et al. 2005; Newmaster et al. 2006; Kress and Erickson 2007; Fazekas et al. 2008; Hollingsworth et al. 2011). The tiered approach is an efficient two-region approach that overcomes the issue of alignment with noncoding regions such as the trnH-psbA spacer or highly variable nuclear regions such as ITS2 (Newmaster et al. 2006). This approach uses rbcL, as the first tier because it is easily amplified and aligned, which provides a scaffold for a highly variable second tier region such as ITS2 (Newmaster et al. 2013a). Earlier recommendations for including matK as a core plant barcode (CBOL Plant Working Group 2009) have now been invalidated because of associated problems encountered with PCR amplification and considerable costs associated with retrieval of a matK DNA sequence (Von Cräutlein et al. 2011; Kuzmina et al. 2012). Current research suggests the use of ITS2 as the second tier as proposed by Chen et al. because it provides higher species resolution (Yao et al. 2010; China Plant BOL Group 2011). Many applications have been using this rbcL + ITS2 tiered approach to monitor species diversity (Von Cräutlein et al. 2011), reconstruct animal diet from scat samples (McMullin et al. 2011), discover new species (Liu et al. 2013), identify plants in ethnopharmacology (Liu et al. 2012), floristic analysis (Kuzmina et al. 2012) and to detect fraudulent market place substitution in the natural health products industry (Newmaster et al. 2013a, b, c; Nithaniyal et al. 2014).

Past research examining genetic variation in small millets has focused mostly at the subfamily level with limited research resolving variation at either the specific or intraspecific level (Salimath et al. 1995; Panwar et al. 2010; Gupta et al. 2011a, b). Recently, Maloles et al. used DNA barcoding to examine genetic variation in plastid regions rbcL, trnH-psbA and matK among 19 TK landraces, but found that these regions were invariant. Expanding on this study, Newmaster et al. (2013a, b, c) used the nuclear regions ITS (ITS, ITS1 and ITS2) to examine variation between 15 landraces from rural southern India. They observed high interspecific and intraspecific variation in the ITS regions among six species of small millets. In addition, they identified 100 % accurate species and landraces from 150 blind samples and showed that genomic variation is aligned with the TK hierarchical classification. Furthermore, they also found that the plastid region trnH-psbA allowed differentiation for eight out of 15 landraces. Though classification by farmers is finer than that of scientific classification, it is impractical to employ TK as a species identification tool due to its complex and time-consuming nature. Newmaster et al. (2013a, b, c) demonstrated the potential of DNA barcoding as a reliable millet identification tool and the use of ITS and trnH-psbA regions as standardized genomic regions for evaluating genetic diversity among species and landraces (Newmaster et al. 2013a, b, c).

There are key uncertainties concerning the genetic and trait diversity of small millets. We have a limited understanding of TK of landraces and a very poor understanding of how much variation there is in genetic, trait and TK among the many landraces still used today. Such information can help inform breeding and sustainability programs targeted towards conserving these underutilized yet valuable crops that support many rural communities of southern Asia. The present study aims to answer the following questions to provide more information on the diversity among small millet landraces: Is there a variation in traits among the small millet landraces? If so, how does this variation group landraces in multivariate ordination space?; Is there a sufficient genetic variation (ITS2, trnH-psbA) to allow a fine scale classification of 32 small millets?; and How can DNA barcodes can help in protecting farmers’ rights recognized under the CBD?


