
Abstract

Tuberous roots of Aconitum heterophyllum constitute storage organ for secondary metabolites, however, molecular components contributing to their formation are not known. The transcriptomes of A. heterophyllum were analyzed to identify possible genes associated with tuberous root development by taking clues from genes implicated in other plant species. Out of 18 genes, eight genes encoding GDP-mannose pyrophosphorylase (GMPase), SHAGGY, Expansin, RING-box protein 1 (RBX1), SRF receptor kinase (SRF), β-amylase, ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (AGPase) and Auxin responsive factor 2 (ARF2) showed higher transcript abundance in roots (13–171 folds) compared to shoots. Comparative expression analysis of those genes between tuberous root developmental stages showed 11–97 folds increase in transcripts in fully developed roots compared to young rootlets, thereby implying their association in biosynthesis, accumulation and storage of primary metabolites towards root biomass. Cluster analysis revealed a positive correlation with the gene expression data for different stages of tuberous root formation in A. heterophyllum. The outcome of this study can be useful in genetic improvement of A. heterophyllum for root biomass yield.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0466-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Aconitum heterophyllum Wall ex Royle (Ranunculaceae), popularly known as Atis, is a biennial herb native to North-Western and Eastern Himalayas of India. Its tuberous roots are commonly used as therapeutic ingredient in the traditional indian medicinal system for curing dyspepsia, abdominal pain, diabetes and diarrhea (Kumar et al. 2016). Non-toxic active components like atisine, hetisine and heteratisine (Pelletier et al. 1968; Malhotra et al. 2014) accumulating in tuberous roots of A. heterophyllum have wide pharmacological effects on immune, digestive and nervous systems (Rastogi and Mehrotra 1991; Sojitra et al. 2013).

Tuberization in A. heterophyllum is a distinctive process from young rootlet to fully mature storage roots which are committed to the storage of primary as well as secondary metabolites. Several studies on morphogenesis have been carried out to understand tuberous root development in various plant species such as Ipomoea batatas and Manihot esculenta (Indira and Kurian 1977; Wang et al. 2005). Multiple genes, such as MADS-box, NAM-like and SRF have been shown to regulate tuberous root development in these plant species (You et al. 2003; Tanaka et al. 2005). The elevated expression of gene encoding AGPase enzyme in tuberous roots of M. esculenta has been shown to enhance biomass yield (Ihemere et al. 2006). The fundamental genetic mechanism controlling their formation in Rehmannia glutinosa has been studied to decipher the role of tuberous root development genes (Sun et al. 2010). With the advent of new technologies, a comprehensive analysis of transcriptome and proteome datasets in R. glutinosa provided new insight on the mechanisms for the formation of storage organ (Li et al. 2015). However, the knowledge on developmental pattern of tuberous roots in A. heterophyllum is limited. The development of tuberous roots in this plant species undergoes simple, yet unique process. After seed germination, the primary roots grow immediately from the radicle and transform directly into tuberous roots rather formed into adventitious roots as in other plant species (Pal et al. 2015). Therefore, the tuberous root formation in A. heterophyllum provides a unique system to explore mechanism of sink tissue formation and development vis-à-vis accumulation of root biomass.

The tuberous roots of A. heterophyllum contain primary metabolites including starch and other carbohydrates besides aconites, the secondary metabolites found in the buttercup family (Ukani et al. 1996; Rana et al. 2010). Starch biosynthesis genes like AGPase and β-amylase have shown changes in expression pattern during various tuberous root developmental stages in I. batatas (Wang et al. 2006). Carbohydrate metabolism pathways were found to be activated in storage roots of Raphanus sativus (Mitsui et al. 2015). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) transcriptomes analysis of A. heterophyllum root and shoot tissues identified plausible candidate genes responsible for tuberous root formation and development through in silico expression profiling (Pal et al. 2015), which have been further assessed for their association with growth and developmental mechanism of tuberous roots. Fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped fragment (FPKM) based expression profiling study was done to identify differentially regulated genes involved in root biomass enhancement. Genes pertaining to primary metabolism in plants, such as starch production, photosynthesis, hormone metabolism and transcription factors were also studied to associate their role in storage organ development and root biomass production in A. heterophyllum.


