


Introduction

The combustion of fossil fuels has created a global anxiety for the environment and world economy. Overuse of fossil fuel is increasing the carbon dioxide level in the atmosphere and significantly contributes to the global warming (Silva et al. 2011; Abdel-Fattah and Abdel-Naby 2012). Countries across the world have directed state policies toward the utilization of biomass for meeting their future energy demands to meet carbon dioxide reduction targets as specified in the Kyoto Protocol as well as to decrease dependence on the supply of fossil fuels (Sarkar et al. 2012). Thus, there is a pressing need to adapt to the use of bioethanol as a renewable and clean energy source. Recently, research has focused on using non-edible biomass as raw materials including lignocelluloses, celluloses, and marine algae rather than the first-generation biomass such as starch and sugar biomass (Demirbas 2010; Ganguly et al. 2012).

Agro residues when used for ethanol production may address this problem to an extent, but the operation of large-scale plants for cellulosic ethanol production still have several limitations, including high capital investment, technical knowledge, and the high transportation costs of feedstock.

In India, water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), an aquatic weed, was first observed in West Bengal at the beginning of 1890 and is now present throughout the country except in the more arid western part of Rajasthan, in the rugged regions of the north, and in Kashmir. This tropical plant infests large areas of water resources and consequently leads to reduction of biodiversity, blockage of rivers, and drainage system, depletion of dissolved oxygen, alteration of water chemistry, and involvement in environmental pollution (Guragain et al. 2011). The plant tolerates extremes in water level fluctuations, seasonal variations in flow velocity, nutrient availability, pH, temperature, and toxic substances (Ganguly et al. 2012). The utilization of water hyacinth as the feedstock for bioethanol production has a number of advantages. Water hyacinth is low in lignin content with high amounts of cellulose and hemicellulose (Poddar et al. 1991; Gressel 2008). This lignocellulose can more easily be bio-converted by enzymatic means to fermentable sugar, thus resulting in an enormous amount of utilizable biomass for bioethanol production. In addition, being an aquatic plant, it does not compete with food crops for arable lands. Its very high growth rate, 60–100 ton/ha/year, is also favorable for its commercial cultivation (Mishima et al. 2008). However, as cellulose components are generally covered with lignin and hemicellulose in the cellulosic biomass, it is necessary to degrade and remove lignin as well as hemicellulose from the cellulosic biomass. Thus, the suitable pretreatment method is required to accelerate the saccharification of cellulosic biomass and their bioconversion to ethanol.

Ideally, these pretreatments attempt to minimize the loss of sugars, consume minimum amounts of energy, improve the enzymatic digestibility, reduce the quantity of by-products and fermentation inhibitors, and reduce costs. In this regard production of lignocellulosic bioethanol from the widely available waste biomass like water hyacinth can serve a dual purpose. Besides reduction of fossil fuel scarcity, it can control environmental pollution and accelerate rural development. As in most developing countries, the majority of India’s labor force works in the agricultural sector; therefore, in India there is particularly high potential for bioethanol to raise incomes, provide employment, and contribute to rural development.


