
Abstract

Recent advances in culture-independent studies of microbes had proved to be more reliable and efficient than the conventional ones. The isolation of good quality and quantity of total community DNA are one of the major hurdles in this endeavour. Shearing of DNA during the extraction process and the co-extraction of inhibitory compounds reduce the quality of the isolated nucleic acids making it unsuitable for the construction of large insert metagenomic libraries. In the present study, a multi-level filtration step was brought in which efficiently isolated total bacterial DNA from three different environment samples. The preprocessing method could efficiently improve the 260/230 ratio of the isolated DNA by 2.3–45 % and decreased the protein contamination by 22.5–34.5 % on saltpan and arctic sediment samples, respectively. The more significant part of the experiment was that the DNA obtained was of high quality with minimal shearing making it most suitable for the construction of large insert genomic libraries. PCR amplification of 16S rRNA gene confirmed that the filtration method was effective in the isolation of high-quality DNA.



Introduction

Metagenomic approach provides access to microbial genomics and their function which helps in the exploitation of novel biocatalysts from unculturable microbial communities of various ecosystems. Community DNA isolation from different marine environments is a challenging process, since the ecosystems are extremely diverse and contain inhibitory compounds, such as humic acids. Ecosystems, such as mangroves, salt pans, and Arctic deserve, much attention in terms of metagenomic studies due to its uniqueness. Mangroves are productive marine ecosystems and biologically important intertidal zones rich in nutrient content and micro flora. Microbial community found in mangrove sediments is a potent source of important biocatalysts that enable them to live in adverse conditions. Salt pans are manmade ecosystems with extreme conditions, where microorganisms survive at very high salinities with intense solar radiations. Arctic regions are characterized by extremely low temperature, and serve as an important source of isolation of psychrophilic/psychrotolerant microbes, and also cold-adapted enzymes. Metagenomics is a very potent tool for the analysis of these extreme habitats harboring organisms that are often difficult to cultivate.



Discussion

The sediment samples under the current experiment were rich in microorganisms as well as organic matter especially humic acids which denature DNA by binding phenolic groups to amides. The presence of humic substances in DNA samples, interfere in enzyme-mediated molecular processes, such as digestion, and amplification and ligation in metagenomic library construction (Paul and Clark 1989; Robe 2003; Whitehouse and Hottel 2007). Since downstream processes in molecular biology demand good quantity of inhibitor-free metagenomic DNA, extraction methods have high significance (Siddhapura et al. 2010). Numerous DNA extraction methods in vogue had been discussed and practiced for the isolation of DNA from soil (Bruce et al. 1992; Zhou et al. 1996; Kuske et al. 1998; Yeates et al. 1998; Miller et al. 1999; Bertrand et al. 2005; Desai and Madamwar 2007). However, the major problem is the humic acid contamination and shearing of DNA that makes it unsuitable for the construction of large insert libraries. Use of polyvinyl pyrolidone (PVP), polyvinyl polypyrolidone (PVPP), CTAB, and PEG has been helpful in reducing the load of humic and fulvic acids along with that of DNA, but it significantly reduces the yield. Purdy et al. used PEG to precipitate DNA which significantly reduced humate contamination, but its yield was significantly less compared to that of alcohol precipitation (Krsek and wellington 1999). Krsek and wellington also suggested the comparative reduction in the co-extraction of humic substances by the use of low amounts of SDS and EDTA during DNA isolation. Harry et al. suggested the use of electrophoretic methods to be the best for the separation of humic acid from DNA. The presence of high levels of phenolic compounds in crude DNA extracts even after consistent purification by electrophoresis decreased the PCR amplification. Abu Al-Soud explained the use of BSA along with the PCR mix to improve the amplification. The use of several columns and beads of Sepharose significantly reduced the humate load, but it significantly reduced the amount of DNA which can lead to a misrepresentation of the microflora in the system. The use of beads and columns also results in extensive physical strain that shears the DNA making it not suitable for the construction of large insert libraries. The use of gel-plus-minicolumn and gel-plus-concentrator methods (Zhou et al. 1996), Sephadex G-200 spin column purification (Miller et al. 1999), and cesium chloride (CsCl) density gradient centrifugation (Bertrand et al. 2005) is laborious, time-consuming, and result in significant DNA loss. Miller et al. also stated that the serial dilution of DNA reduced the concentration of PCR inhibitors.

The successful recovery of high molecular weight (HMW) DNA and its quality is a mandate for the molecular analysis to access the large pool of genomic information encoded within the metagenome (Ward et al. 1990; Zhou et al. 1996). Construction of large insert metagenomic library is currently used as a genomic approach to study the physiology of unculturable microorganisms (Rondon et al. 2000; Liles et al. 2003). Isolation of HMW DNA is important in the construction of metagenomic libraries, as it increases the possibilities of retaining a complete genetic machinery needed for a biosynthetic pathway (Bertrand et al. 2005). It also helps to reduce the risk of chimera formation during PCR amplification (Liesack and Stackebrandt 1992).

In this study, sediment samples from saltpan, mangrove, and arctic environments were preprocessed to remove inhibitory substances, such as humic acid and fulvic acid, from the sediment samples. The preprocessing steps involved sequential multistage filtration. Sediment samples were treated with saline water, subjected to low-speed centrifugation and filtered through filter membranes to retain the microbes. DNA was extracted from the bacterial fraction on the filter membranes. DNA extracted from this modified filtration method was compared with the DNA samples isolated without any preprocessing. The preprocessing could efficiently improve the 260/230 ratio of the isolated DNA by 2.3–45 % which depicts the reduction in the co-isolation of humic acid and it showed a pronounced decrease in the protein contamination by 22.5–34.5 % on saltpan and arctic sediment samples, respectively. The most significant observation was that preprocessing also helped to reduce the shearing of genomic DNA which is needed for the downstream molecular analyses, such as PCR and large insert genomic library construction without further purification or selection steps. The quality and purity of the metagenomic DNA were evaluated based on the PCR efficacy analysis, as Taq polymerase is sensitive to contaminants, such as humic acid (Zhou et al. 1996), and it clearly showed that the preprocessing could yield DNA with a better quality as evident from the strength of the amplicons in comparison with those isolated directly. Earlier reports showed the need of 1000–10,000-fold dilution of metagenomic DNA for a successful amplification of the 16S rRNA gene. Hence, the PCR efficacy analysis also clearly showed that the metagenomic DNA isolated contained relatively low concentration of PCR inhibitory substances and has sufficient purity for PCR without the need for further purification as compared to other DNA extraction methods (Borneman et al. 1996; Zhou et al. 1996; Miller et al. 1999; Bertrand et al. 2005).
