
Abstract

Xylitol production was compared in fed batch fermentation by Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains overexpressing xylose reductase (XR) genes from Candida tropicalis, Pichia stipitis, Neurospora crassa, and an endogenous gene GRE3. The gene encoding a xylose specific transporter (SUT1) from P. stipitis was cloned to improve xylose transport and fed batch fermentation was used with glucose as a cosubstrate to regenerate NADPH. Xylitol yield was near theoretical for all the strains in fed batch fermentation. The highest volumetric (0.28 gL−1 h−1) and specific (34 mgg−1 h−1) xylitol productivities were obtained by the strain overexpressing GRE3 gene, while the control strain showed 7.2 mgg−1 h−1 specific productivity. The recombinant strains carrying XR from C. tropicalis, P. stipitis, and N. crassa produced xylitol with lower specific productivity of 14.3, 6.8, and 6.3 mgg−1 h−1, respectively, than GRE3 overexpressing strain. The glucose fed as cosubstrate was converted to biomass and ethanol, while xylose was only converted to xylitol. The efficiency of ethanol production was in the range of 38–45 % of the theoretical maximum for all the strains. Xylitol production from the non-detoxified corncob hemicellulosic hydrolysate by recombinant S. cerevisiae was reported for the first time. Xylitol productivity was found to be equivalent in the synthetic xylose as well as hemicellulosic hydrolysate-based media showing no inhibition on the S. cerevisiae due to the inhibitors present in the hydrolysate. A systematic evaluation of heterologous XRs and endogenous GRE3 genes was performed, and the strain overexpressing the endogenous GRE3 gene showed the best xylitol productivity.



Introduction

Xylitol, the sugar alcohol is a promising polyol due to its application as a low calorie sweetener. It can be used for its antimicrobial properties to prevent dental and other infections (Nevoigt 2008). Xylitol is conventionally produced by hydrolysis and hydrogenation of xylan to xylitol under high temperature and pressure conditions. In spite of very high conversion efficiency, this technology has certain constrains viz. requirements of high pressure, temperature, expensive catalyst, and extensive downstream operations (Leathers 2003). Microorganisms convert xylose to xylitol by the cofactor-dependent xylose reductase (XR or Xyl1) enzyme (Saha 2003; Cocotle-Ronzon et al. 2012). The majority of essential cofactor NADPH/NADH for the XR activity is regenerated through pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) (Bengtsson et al. 2009; Schwartz et al. 2012). Several microorganisms have been screened and studied with respect to their ability for assimilation of xylose as carbon source and conversion to xylitol. Extensive research has been conducted to isolate and identify the suitable yeasts for xylitol production (Barbosa et al. 1988; Parajo et al. 1998a). Xylitol producing yeasts, such as P. stipitis, C. tropicalis, C. guilliermondii, D. hansenii (Mohamad et al. 2015), and K. marxianus (Zhang et al. 2013), have been studied for the optimization of the fermentation parameters, utilization of various nutrients, and fermentation of xylose rich hemicellulosic hydrolysate obtained from different sources of pretreated biomass (Parajo et al. 1998a, b; Dominguez et al. 1996; Ping et al. 2013). These organisms were preferred, as they exhibited efficient conversion of xylose to xylitol. Several reports on Candida species involved studies on the fermentation of pretreated biomass hydrolysates. Ghindea et al. have provided a review on various microorganisms studied for xylose transport and xylitol production.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae does not naturally utilize xylose as a carbon source, yet was preferred due to its GRAS (Generally Regarded As Safe) status. S. cerevisiae carries GRE3 gene encoding a non-specific NADPH-dependent aldose reductase that converts xylose to xylitol (Kuhn et al. 1995). Many researchers have attempted to overexpress heterologous xylose reductases from P. stipitis or several Candida species in S. cerevisiae mainly for ethanol or xylitol production. However, strains overexpressing endogenous GRE3 gene have not been evaluated systematically for xylitol production using media derived from pretreated biomass. The byproducts generated during the pretreatment of biomass, such as furans, weak acids, and phenolics, inhibit the cell metabolism individually or synergistically (Almeida et al. 2007; Hu et al. 2009). S. cerevisiae acquires tolerance to some inhibitors, such as HMF and furfural, due to the presence of some oxido-reductase enzymes (Heer et al. 2009).

The recombinant strains developed for xylitol production exhibit low productivity and xylose consumption rate in biomass derived media (Menon et al. 2010; Karhumaa et al. 2005). In the previous reports, P. stipitis XR has been cloned and overexpressed in S. cerevisiae for xylose metabolism. A detailed review on the various genetic engineering strategies of S. cerevisiae and fermentation of xylose containing media has been provided by Chu and Lee. In some cases, multiple genes have been altered through or overexpressed, but endogenous gene expression levels have been rarely modified for xylitol production.

The present investigation deals with the evaluation of the conversion of xylose to xylitol by S. cerevisiae strains overexpressing different XR genes. The gene SUT1 was cloned to avoid the limitation of xylose transportation in the S. cerevisiae cells. The xylitol production by the recombinant S. cerevisiae strains was compared in hemicellulosic hydrolysate of corn cob with the fed batch fermentation process.


