
Abstract

The present investigation demonstrates Couroupita guianensis flower buds extract mediated synthesis of stable silver nanoparticles (AgNPs). Instant formation of AgNPs was primarily confirmed by the appearance of yellowish brown colour and characteristic silver SPR band in the UV–visible spectrum. Elemental and crystalline natures of the AgNPs were identified from EDX and XRD pattern, respectively. Spherical morphology and the mono-disparity were revealed from TEM and AFM images. The particle size ranged from 5 to 30 nm and average size of 17 nm was consistent in XRD, TEM and AFM measurements. Possible reduction and stabilizing agents, viz., phenolics, flavonoids and proteins were identified from the characteristic FTIR peaks representing their functional groups. The strong antibacterial activity of synthesized AgNPs against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria exhibited the potential for the formulation of synergistic bactericides by combining antibacterial properties of Couroupita flower buds extract and silver salts for biomedical applications.



Introduction

Phytosynthesis methods of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are emerging as a potential alternative to physical and chemical processes, ever since the first report on Geranium leaf cell free extract mediated synthesis (Shankar et al. 2003), and demonstration of their applications in a number of fields including medicine. The properties and specific applications of AgNPs depend on their shape, size and dispersion. Cell free extract method offers a number of possibilities and flexibility to control various parameters determining the architecture of the nanoparticle. Live plants posses innate nanoparticle synthetic ability as a part of biomineralization, fortification and metal tolerance traits, was evolved to colonize metalliferous soils, this nanoparticle fabrication potential was demonstrated in many plant systems (Marchiol 2012). Efficient and stable synthesis of AgNPs depends on plant species employed and nature of extract.

Varied primary and secondary metabolites of plants, viz., proteins, enzymes, polysaccharides, amino acids and vitamins, antioxidants, flavonoids, flavones, isoflavones, catechins, anthocyanidins, isothiocyanates, carotenoids, polyphenols were attributed as reducing and stabilization agents in the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles (Park et al. 2011). The availability of vast metabolite diversity and unexplored potential of exotic and rare plant systems, a lot of attention is being paid to combine phytochemistry and nanotechnology to develop nanomaterials with desirable size and morphology.

Antimicrobial activity of AgNPs was most extensively evaluated for applications in the medical field to prepare medicines, devices, implants, polymers and dressing material to control infections. Biosynthetic AgNPs are preferred due to their enhanced antimicrobial activity over silver ions and biocompatibility. Antimicrobial activity of AgNPs varies with their size (Panacek et al. 2006), and phytosynthesis of AgNPs with varied size and morphology was reported earlier (Mohanpuria et al. 2008) by employing different plant species.

Couroupita guianensis, a member of threatened list (local name: Cannon ball tree) is one of the two species representing Lecythidaceae family, found rarely in Botanical gardens and temples in India. Various plant parts viz., leaves, flowers, fruit and bark possess antibacterial, antifungal, antiseptic and analgesic qualities. The flowers are used to cure cold, stomach aches, intestinal gas formation and Diarrhea (Prabhu and Subban 2012).

Generally different parts of flower buds are loaded with antimicrobial and other compounds to protect vital reproductive process. Several chemical constituents with novel structures and bio-active moieties viz. aliphatic hydrocarbon, stigmasterol, alkaloids, phenolics, flavonoids, isatin and terpenoids have been reported from the flowers (Rane et al. 2001; Wong and Tie 1995). Similar phytochemical principles reported from Couroupita flowers are implicated in antimicrobial activity, reduction of metal ions and stabilization of AgNPs from other plant systems (Mohanpuria et al. 2008). In the light of the above background, we hypothesize that potential antimicrobial formulations can be developed by combining antimicrobial activity of phytochemicals and their potential to synthesize AgNPs. Here, we report efficient synthesis of AgNPs using Couroupita flower bud extract and their synergistic antibacterial activity for the first time.


