
Abstract

Today green synthesis of silver nanoparticles (SNPs) from plants is an utmost emerging filed in nanotechnology. In the present study, we have reported a green method for synthesis of SNPs from aqueous stem bark extract of Syzygium alternifolium, an endemic medicinal plant of South Eastern Ghats. These green-synthesised nanoparticles are characterised by colour change pattern, and the broad peak obtained at 448 nm with UV–Vis surface plasmon resonance studies confirm that the synthesised nanoparticles are SNPs. FT-IR spectroscopic studies confirm that phenols and proteins of stem bark extract is mainly responsible for capping and stabilisation of synthesised SNPs. Crystallographic studies from XRD indicates, the SNPs are crystalline in nature owing to 44 nm size. EDAX analysis shows 19.28 weight percentage of Ag metal in the sample indicates the purity of sample. AFM, SEM and TEM microscopic studies reveal that the nanoparticles are spherical in shape with sizes ranging from 4 to 48 nm. Antimicrobial studies of the synthesised SNPs on clinically isolated microbes showed very toxic effects. It indicates that stem bark extract of S. alternifolium is suitable for synthesising stable silver nanoparticles which act as excellent antimicrobial agents.



Introduction

Nanotechnology is one of the most fascinating research areas in modern material science. Nanoparticles are gaining importance in the fields of biology, medicine and electronics owing to their unique physical and biological properties (Morones et al. 2005). Recent studies are focused towards synthesis of nanoparticles using plant materials like, iron, copper, calcium, gold, palladium, zinc and silver. Silver has been recognised of its importance in chemistry, physics and biology due to its unique properties. Conventional methods to synthesise silver nanoparticles are mainly by different chemical, physical and microbial approaches. The most common approach for synthesis of SNPs in chemical approach is by the use of sodium borohydride (NaBH4) and citrate as reducing agents. Topical exposure of NaBH4 severely irritates skin and eye, breathing NaBH4 irritates nose and throat, higher exposures can cause pulmonary edema, and very higher exposure may affect nervous system. Citrate causes hypocalcaemia, fatigue, paresthesia and muscle spasms. Common methods for the synthesis of SNPs by physical approach are laser ablation and evaporation/condensation methods. Evaporation/condensation method which could be carried out by using a tube furnace at atmospheric pressure has some disadvantages: occupies large space and consumes a great amount of power. Laser ablation method is also not a cost effective method. These chemical and physical approaches are complicated, expensive and cause potential environmental and biological hazards. In recent times, 50–120 nm-sized silver nanoparticles are synthesised from Bacillus species which acts as a good reducing agent (Vithiyav et al. 2014) but, a significant drawback of microbe-mediated synthesis is that it is not industrially feasible due to its lab maintenance. Therefore, the biosynthesis of SNPs using plant materials is easy, efficient and eco-friendly in comparison to chemical-mediated or microbe-mediated synthesis of SNPs (Anamika et al. 2012). Silver has long been known to have strong inhibitory and bactericidal effects as well as broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity even at low concentrations (Morones et al. 2005). Hence, among the metal nanoparticles, SNPs synthesised from medicinal plants have received much attention for their various biological properties such as anthelmintic (Seema and Amrish 2012), antilarvicidic (Sundaravadivelan et al. 2013), antioxidant (Kumara Swamy et al. 2014), anticancer (Vasanth et al. 2014), anti-inflammatory (Rafie and Hamed 2014), hepatoprotective (Bhuvaneswari et al. 2014), wound healing (Seema et al. 2014) and antimicrobial (Marutikesavakumar et al. 2014).

S. alternifolium belongs to the family Myrtaceae, locally known as mogi or adavineredu. It occurs in the upper plateau, slopes and valley tops with dry, slate and rocky conditions at an elevation ranging from 600 to 1000 m in Sri Venkateswara Wildlife Sanctuary of Chittoor and Cuddapah Districts of Eastern Ghats, Andhra Pradesh, India (Mohan and Lakshmi 2000). Andhra Pradesh State Biodiversity Board (Biodiversity News 2009) documented that the S. alternifolium is an endemic and globally endangered species as per the criteria of IUCN-CAMP to this area. Chloroform and methanolic root extract of S. alternifolium has analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity (Vasu et al. 2012). Leaf juice and pulp of the tender shoots are used to treat bacillary dysentery. Leaves fried in cow ghee are used as a curry to treat dry cough (Rao 2004). Some of the researchers have scientifically proven that leaves have antimicrobial activity (Raju et al. 2007), hypoglycemic and anti-hyperglycemic activity (Ramamohan et al. 2010), antioxidant (Sreelathadevi et al. 2013) and anticancer activity (Komuraiah et al. 2014). Yanadi tribe and local villagers of Veyilingalakona sacred grove and Chenchu and Nakkala tribes of Japali hanuman theertham make fruits into fine powder to treat diarrhoea (Savithramma et al. 2014a) and diabetes (Savithramma et al. 2014b), respectively. Stem bark extract used to treat gastric ulcers (Bakshu 2002), possess antiseptic properties (Rao 2004), to treat external wounds (Karuppusamy et al. 2009) and to regulate blood sugar levels (Sudhakar et al. 2012). In recent studies, synthesis of SNPs was carried out from endemic medicinal plants like Pterocarpus santalinus (Gopinath et al. 2013), Boswellia ovalifoliolata (Ankanna et al. 2010) and Shorea tumbuggaia (Venkateswarlu et al. 2010) which are very rich source of phenols and proteins and act as a good source towards the reduction of silver nanoparticles. There is no report on synthesis of SNPs from S. alternifolium stem bark so far. Hence the present study is undertaken to synthesise stable silver nanoparticles from stem bark extract of S. alternifolium and test their antimicrobial potentialities after characterization using advanced tools.


