
Abstract

The present study reports that the biosynthesis of AgNPs using an endophytic fungus isolated from the ethnomedicinal plant Centella asiatica. The endophytic fungus was identified as Aspergillus versicolor ENT7 based on 18S rRNA gene sequencing (NCBI Accession number KF493864). The AgNPs synthesized were characterized by UV–visible spectroscopy, Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopy (FTIR), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), particle size analyzer, and zeta potential measurements. The UV–Vis absorption spectra showed the peak at 429 nm which confirmed the synthesis of AgNPs. TEM analysis revealed that the AgNPs were spherical in shape with 3–40 nm in size; similar results were also obtained by Horiba particle size analyzer with 5–40 nm in size. The synthesized AgNPs were highly stable due to their high negative zeta potential value of −38.2 mV. XRD studies showed,,,, and planes of the face-centered cubic (FCC) lattice, indicating the crystalline nature of the AgNPs. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the AgNPs showed five circular fringes which were in accordance with XRD data and confirmed the formation of high crystalline nature of AgNPs. FTIR measurements indicated the peaks at 3273, 2925, 1629, 1320, and 1020 cm−1 corresponding to different functional groups possibly involved in the synthesis and stabilization of AgNPs. The synthesized AgNPs exhibited effective free radical scavenging activity with the IC50 value of 60.64 µg/ml. The synthesized AgNPs were found to be highly toxic against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and also showed a very good antifungal activity.



Introduction

Over the last decade majority of the researchers shifted their focus to nanometer-sized particles, particularly metal nanoparticles because of their controllable size and shape, ease of synthesis, and strong optical properties. The unique size- and shape-dependent properties of metal nanoparticles have significantly impacted all spheres of human life and making nanobiotechnology a promising field (Ravindran et al. 2013). Nanobiotechnology find innumerable applications due to strong optical absorbance and surface bioconjugation with molecular biomarkers related to surface plasmon resonance effect (Kreibig and Vollmer 1995). Noble metal nanoparticles particularly silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have gained a significant interest in the recent years, owing to their remarkable optical, optoelectronic, magnetic, catalytic, and thermal properties and thus find applications as optical receptors (Karimzadeh and Mansour 2010), sensors (Cobley et al. 2009), catalysts in chemical reactions (Edison and Sethuraman 2012), signal enhancers in SERS-based enzyme Immunoassay (Chen et al. 2009), DNA detection and delivery, bio-analyzers (Ravindran et al. 2013), Cytotoxic (Asad et al. 2013), free radical scavenging (Ramamurthy et al. 2013), and antimicrobial agents (Netala et al. 2014, 2015a; Kotakadi et al. 2013).

Several physical and chemical approaches have been reported for the biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles, including thermal decomposition (Plante et al. 2010), laser ablations (Simakin et al. 2004), gamma radiation assisted (Chol et al. 2005), polyol assisted, and chemical reduction methods (Frattine et al. 2005). Irradiation and other physical methods are not environmental friendly and also possess health risks. Hazardous chemicals, such as hydroxylamine, poly-N-vinyl pyrrolidine, polyvinyl alcohol, and sodium borohydride, are involved in the chemical approaches. The application of chemical approaches is not eco-friendly and possesses biological risks, and the toxic chemicals on the surface limit the applications of AgNPs in pharmaceutical and biomedical fields. Hence, the biological methods for the synthesis of AgNPs have gained a significant interest in the field of nanotechnology. Supramolecular complexes of biomolecules and their topographic and electrostatic properties are being widely employed in biomedical and pharmaceutical fields. Peptides to proteins, sugars to polysaccharides, isoprenes to terpenoids, polyphenols, glycosides, plant and microbial derived compounds, viral particles, etc., are being constantly explored for the biosynthesis of metal nanoparticles and novel carriers. Biological approaches are simple, rapid, and cost effective and involve the synthesis of non-toxic, clean, and biocompatible AgNPs. Fungal mediated synthesis of AgNPs has recently emerged as a new avenue in the field of nanobiotechnology. Compared to bacteria, fungi are more advantageous, because they grow at fast rates and very easy to culture, and maintain in the laboratory. Fungi being eukaryotes produce high amounts of proteins and other biomolecules. These proteins and biomolecules will often associate with nanoparticles that must be preventing the agglomeration and stabilize nanoparticles. Various fungi have been reported to synthesize AgNPs, including Alternaria alternate (Monali et al. 2009), Amylomyces rouxii (Javed et al. 2010), Aspergillus niger (Netala et al. 2015b), Coriolus versicolor (Rashmi and Varma 2009), Fusarium solani (Rafie et al. 2012), Humicola sp (Asad et al. 2013), Neurospora crossa (Longoria et al. 2011), Schizophyllum radiatum (Metuku et al. 2014), and Trichoderma viride (Fayaz et al. 2009) have been reported.

Endophytic fungi are the intriguing group of fungal species which colonise living and healthy tissues of plants. Endophytic fungi produce natural bioactive compounds which are considered to be alternative sources for plant producing bioactive compounds (Strobel et al. 2002). Exploration of endophytic fungi for the biosynthesis of AgNPs is considered as their another important application in the pharmaceutical and biomedical field. In the present study, we report the biosynthesis of AgNPs using extracellular filtrate of endophytic fungus Aspergillus versicolor ENT7 strain isolated from the healthy leaf tissues of Centella asiatica, an important medicinal plant which harbors many endophytic fungi. The AgNPs were characterized using different measurements which include UV–Vis, FTIR, XRD, TEM, particle size analyzer, and zeta potential measurements. Biomedical importance of the AgNPs was evaluated by checking for free radical scavenging and antimicrobial activities.


