
Abstract

Even though next-generation sequencing (NGS) has become an invaluable tool in molecular biology, several laboratories with NGS facilities lack trained Bioinformaticians for data analysis. Here, focusing on the variant detection application of NGS analysis, we have developed a fully automated pipeline, namely Variant Discovery and Annotation Tool-Graphical User Interface (VDAP-GUI), which detects and annotates single nucleotide polymorphisms and insertions/deletions from raw sequence reads. VDAP-GUI consolidates several proven methods in each step such as quality control, trimming, mapping, variant detection and annotation. It supports multiple NGS platforms and has four methodological choices for variant detection. Further, it can re-analyze existing data with alternate thresholds and generates easily interpretable reports in html and tab-delimited formats. Using VDAP-GUI, we have analyzed a publically available human whole-exome sequence dataset. VDAP-GUI is developed using Perl/Tk programming, and is available for free download and use at http://sourceforge.net/projects/vdapgui/.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0382-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

In the last decade the massively parallel next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology has revolutionized life science research, which pave the way for several landmark discoveries (Metzker 2010; Shendure and Ji 2008). For example, a single experiment can identify thousands of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small INDELs associated to a genetic disorder (Stitziel et al. 2011). With the introduction of affordable desktop NGS platforms several small and medium sized laboratories use this technology for whole genome/exome, transcriptome or metagenome applications (Gullapalli et al. 2012). Even though some NGS data analysis pipelines in the free domain are frequently updated to handle the huge datasets, more efficient and user-friendly analytical solution need to be evolved, especially in variant discovery applications. Present challenges in NGS data analysis includes computation power, storage, data sharing, expensive commercial softwares and requirement of skilled professionals (Sarovich and Price 2014). This apart, the fragmented nature of NGS softwares makes a comprehensive analysis out of reach for many life science researchers. Although few automated pipelines have been developed recently, many of them lack a user-friendly interface or are limited by functionality (Blanca et al. 2011; D’Antonio et al. 2013; Sarovich and Price 2014).

Here, we have developed VDAP-GUI, an open-source tool for variant detection in eukaryotic genome/exome data. VDAP-GUI wraps several well-validated open-source programs into a single-platform, thereby simplifying and standardizing the analysis workflow. The methods in VDAP-GUI include FastQC (www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) for quality control, PRINSEQ (prinseq.sourceforge.net/) for trimming, Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) (Li and Durbin 2010) for reference mapping. For SNP/INDEL detection it offers three standard methods such as SAMtools (Li et al. 2009), VarScan (Koboldt et al. 2009) and FreeBayes (Garrison and Marth 2012). Further, the variant annotation is carried out using variant effect predictor—VEP tool (http://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep), which supports annotation of 65 eukaryotes.


