
Abstract

Hypoglycemic effect of cyanobacteria has evaluated in the normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic male albino rats as a mammalian model. Normal and streptozotocin-diabetic rats were orally administered cyanobacteria for 60 consecutive days, and their blood levels of glucose, insulin, C-peptide, lipid peroxidation, body weight and enzyme changes were determined using standard methods. Cyanobacteria administration reduced blood glucose level, and increased plasma insulin, C-peptide levels and restored the body weight. Cyanobacteria administration significantly reduced lipid peroxidation in the diabetic rats. Hexokinase enzyme activity was increased, whereas glucose-6-phosphatase enzyme activity decreased in streptozotocin-diabetic rats compared to their respective controls. Cyanobacteria administration caused significant renormalization of serum hepatic enzymes in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. In conclusion, cyanobacteria have a protective effect on anti-oxidant and anti-diabetic in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.



Introduction

Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder in which there are high blood glucose levels over a prolonged time. Type 1 diabetes mellitus is due to the body’s failure to produce enough amount of insulin. Type 2 diabetes mellitus starts with insulin resistance, a condition in which cells unable to respond to insulin properly (Muthuraman et al. 2014a, b). The number of diabetics is tremendously increasing in developing countries due to lifestyle (Sridhar et al. 2002). The careful control of blood glucose is a vital part of the management of diabetic complications (Muthuraman and Srikumar 2009). There are several anti-diabetic drugs available to control blood glucose level; however, these drugs produce side effects. There are five major kinds of anti-diabetic drugs such as sulfonylureas, meglitinides, biguanides, thiazolidinediones and alpha-glucosidase inhibitors available in the market. However, these drugs produce several side effects such as hypoglycemia, skin allergy, skin rash, gastrointestinal upset, fluid retention, edema, weight gain, lactic acidosis, nausea, diarrhea, liver function impairment and flatulence. Therefore, a search of the novel anti-diabetic drug without any side effect is mandatory in the clinical research.

The intravenous injection of streptozotocin in male albino Wistar rats makes pancreas swell and causes degeneration of Langerhans islet beta cells of the pancreas and induces experimental diabetes mellitus within 72 h. Streptozotocin induces one type of diabetes which is similar to diabetes mellitus with non-ketosis hyperglycemia. Induction of diabetes with Streptozotocin decreases nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide in pancreatic islet beta cells and causes histopathological effects in beta cells of the pancreas which probably intermediates induction of diabetes.

Several natural products have isolated from a broad range of taxa and tested for biomedical potential. These active components from plant origin have provided several crucial molecules for drug designing. The search of products from natural sources has revolutionized the programs of drug discovery. Several plant-derived molecules have shown a promising potential effect in therapeutics. The use of plant medicines in the treatment of several diseases such as central nervous system disorders is a traditional practice. The cyanobacteria (spirulina platens) have been recognized for their wide abundance. Cyanobacteria are considered as good candidates for applications in agriculture, food industry and pharmaceuticals. Antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, algaecides and cytotoxic activities of cyanobacteria have been reported (Senthilkumar and Ahmed John 2008). Cyanobacteria contain secondary metabolites, bioactive peptides, macrolides and glycosides (Matthew et al. 2010). Cyanobacteria occur naturally in tropical and subtropical lakes with high pH and high concentrations; therefore, their concentrated nutritional profile makes it ideal for those preferring a whole-food supplement to artificial nutrient sources. A search for novel compounds is essential to conquering diabetes mellitus without side effect. Also, cyanobacterial strains have been well characterized, with some anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory potential (Nagasathya and Thajuddin 2003; Rajavel et al. 2009). Our previous study evaluated the effect of cyanobacteria on plasma insulin and increased by regeneration of pancreatic beta cells in alloxan induced diabetic rats following administration (Muthuraman et al. 2009). The present study was therefore undertaken to investigate the chronic effect of cyanobacteria in streptozotocin-induced diabetes in male albino rats.



Discussion

We evaluated the chronic effect of cyanobacteria on diabetic-biochemical markers such as blood glucose content, plasma insulin, C-peptide, lipid peroxidation, weight changes and glycolytic, serum hepatic marker enzyme changes in streptozotocin-induced diabetic male albino rats. Also, cyanobacteria were administered to the normal rats to evaluate the effect in normal condition. Streptozotocin has been widely used for diabetes induction in animal studies (Graham et al. 2011). Streptozotocin induced diabetes as indicated by the symptoms such as glycosuria, hyperglycemia, polyphagia, polydipsia and body weight loss (Deeds et al. 2011).

Cyanobacteria administration significantly renormalized altered biochemical markers in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Glucose, plasma insulin, C-peptide, lipid peroxidation and enzyme levels have evaluated in the control and treated groups. Cyanobacteria administration significantly reduced the glucose level in the streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats, whereas no significant reduction in normal rats, which agrees with our previous findings (Muthuraman et al. 2009). Cyanobacteria administration increased plasma insulin and C-peptide levels in the diabetic rats to the near normal levels, while no significant changes have observed in the normal rats. Increased plasma insulin and C-peptide levels were indicative of the fact that cyanobacteria may enhance the secretion of insulin from the pancreas.

Also, cyanobacteria administration results in gaining weight in diabetic rats, and this may be due to its anti-hyperglycemic potential. Increased glucose-6-phosphatase could utilize for the conversion of carbohydrates to fat. Increased hexokinase enzyme activity indicates the higher rate glycolysis (Anitha and Chandra 2006). Hexokinase and glucose six phosphatase enzyme activities have not significantly changed in the normal rats following cyanobacteria administration. Reduced lipid peroxidation in diabetic rats indicates the anti-oxidant potential of cyanobacteria. ALT, AST, and GGT are indicators of hepatic damage (Whitehead et al. 1999). These enzymes increased in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats due to hepatic damage. Cyanobacteria administration reduced the activities of these enzymes to the near normal levels. Therefore, the anti-hypoglycemic action of cyanobacteria mediated through potentiation of pancreatic secretion of insulin from the intact beta cells of the islets.
