
Abstract

Quorum sensing (QS) plays an important role in virulence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, blocking of QS ability are viewed as viable antimicrobial chemotherapy and which may prove to be a safe anti-virulent drug. Bioactive components from Piper betle have been reported to possess antimicrobial ability. This study envisages on the anti-QS properties of ethanolic extract of P. betle leaf (PbLE) using P. aeruginosa PAO1 as a model organism. A marked reduction in swarming, swimming, and twitching ability of the bacteria is demonstrated in presence of PbLE. The biofilm and pyocyanin production also shows a marked reduction in presence of PbLE, though it does not affect the bacterial growth. Thus, the studies hint on the possible effect of the bioactive components of PbLE on reducing the virulent ability of the bacteria; identification of bioactive compounds should be investigated further.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0348-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Amongst proteobacteria, a widespread cell-to-cell communication (quorum sensing; QS) phenomenon is observed (Krishnan et al. 2012). QS is used to regulate the diverse bacterial function amongst which bioluminescence, biofilm formation, virulence, pigment production, motility and polysaccharide production have been widely studied (Fuqua and Greenberg 2002; Whitehead et al. 2001). Pseudomonas aeruginosa (belonging to Gamma Proteobacteria) is a prevalent opportunistic human pathogen and primarily infecting immune compromised patients (Govan and Deretic 1996). It causes serious eye (Zhu et al. 2004), ear (Tron et al. 2004), burn wounds (Friedstat et al. 2013), urinary tract (Packiavathy et al. 2014) and respiratory tract infection (cystic fibrosis) (Smith et al. 2013; Lyczak et al. 2002). Available antibiotic therapy does not respond to these infections; especially predisposed to infection with P. aeruginosa and hence the bacterium is developing new resistance, responsible for high rates of morbidity and mortality (Lanini et al. 2011). Alternative strategies to conventional antibiotic therapy are therefore required.

QS helps the bacteria to detect their population density by producing, releasing and perceiving the small autoinducer molecules and coordinate a common action such as releasing the virulence factors (Girard and Bloemberg 2008; Jimenez et al. 2012; Kumar et al. 2015). Thus, the virulence phenotypes of the bacteria can be quenched by blocking the QS. QS inhibitor (QSI) may inhibit the QS mechanism and be able to attenuate the virulence of the pathogen and are helpful to break the antibiotic resistance (Vattem et al. 2007; Adonizio et al. 2008). Recent studies have been demonstrated that QSI compound(s) can be found in higher plants such as vanilla (Choo et al. 2006), raspberry (Vattem et al. 2007), clove (Krishnann et al. 2012). In light of these findings, we look into Ayurveda, the oldest traditional medicine system of India, which reports large number of herbs possessing potential preventive and curative properties (Mukherjee and Wahile 2006). In Ayurveda, the use of betel leaves (Piper betle L.) in various ways, as carminative, stimulant, antiseptic, antifungal, antibacterial, anti-diabetic and anti-allergic agent have been mentioned (Guha 2006). The extract of betel leaves have been reported to possess many biological activities that are able to control the growth of many Gram positive and Gram negative microbes (Nair and Chanda 2008). No information however is available on betel leaf extracts to demonstrate its anti-QS activity.

In this study, we report of the anti-QS properties of ethanolic extract P. betle leaf (PbLE); effects of the mobility patterns (namely Swarming, Swimming and Twitching), reduction on biofilm and pyocyanin production in presence of different concentrations of PbLE. This in turn reflects on the virulence of model microorganism P. aeruginosa PAO1.


