
Abstract

Aspergillus terreus MS105 was originally isolated from soil and screened for cellulase production in the presence of various carbon sources including carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), avicel, sigmacell, filter-paper and salicin. CMC induced the production of endoglucanase (EG) and filter-paperase while the levels of β-glucosidase (BGL) were increased when salicin was present in the medium. Nature of production medium influenced the duration of lag- and log-phase of the growth, rate of fungal dry-mass and enzyme production. The volumetric and specific productivity of cellulase under submerged fermentation of grass were 1.7–20-folds higher than sugarcane-bagasse, corncob and commercially available purified substrates. Nonetheless, solid state fermentation (SSF) of crude substrates also yielded high volumetric productivity of EG and BGL. The studies on characterization of enzymes showed that EG was more thermostable than BGL with an optimum activity at 70 °C and a melting temperature of 76 °C. A 1.2–1.5-folds increase in EG activity was observed in the presence of K+, Ca2+ and Mg2+, whereas, the EG and BGL activities remained unaffected in the presence of EDTA. Both the enzyme activities performed optimally under acidic range of pH.



Introduction

Cellulose is a linear polymer of glucose residues linked together by β-1-4 linkages. There can be several thousands of chains comprising microfibrils in plant cell-wall (Beguin and Aubert 1994). With an annual increment of millions of tons, the polymer is considered to be a renewable source of chemicals and energy; hence its degradation has remained a subject of intense research. In addition to complex arrangement of microfibrils through hydrogen bonding, the presence of lignin and hemicelluloses in plant cell-wall hinders the hydrolysis of cellulose. Physico-chemical hydrolysis of lignocellulosics (LC) has remained limited to pretreatment processes such as acidic, alkaline, steam explosion and ammonia fiber explosion (Wyman et al. 2005). The biological pretreatment employs microorganism or microbial enzymes (Kumar et al. 2016), however, the ability of fungal enzymes to degrade LC biomass efficiently has diverted the attention of researchers to enzymatic conversion of LC (Bhat 2000). Being the most abundant polymer present in LC substrates, cellulose is termed as a renewable feedstock of chemicals and energy and hence its biological degradation is a subject of intense research. The complete enzymatic degradation of cellulose requires the concerted action of three enzymes (Lynd et al. 2002), 1,4-D-glucan-4-glucanohydrolase or endoglucanase (EG), 1,4-D-glucan-glucohydrolase or exoglucanase (EX) and D-glucoside-glucohydrolase or β-glucosidase (BGL).

Genes encoding cellulases are dispersed throughout microbial taxonomic groups (Lynd et al. 2002), nonetheless, fungal species are employed industrially for cellulase production and for the conversion of LC (Lynd et al. 2005). The hyphal mode of growth coupled with the ability to produce a battery of hydrolytic enzymes make fungi a suitable choice for the degradation of LC. Fungal strains have long been applied for the degradation of plant based biomass and to produce valuable commodities using crude substrates from plants. Additionally, the fungal enzymes produced on crude LC substrates find an array of biotechnological applications from diagnostics to food and biofuel production (Bhat 2000). Indeed, fungal oxidative and hydrolytic enzymes are being applied for environmental management and biomass degradation (Kues 2015).

Despite several commercial and industrial applications, the enzyme market always finds a competitive disadvantage due to higher production cost of enzymes. There are different strategies which are being sought to reduce the cost of enzyme production; use of agricultural and domestic residues in place of costly fermentation media is one of the widely adopted strategy.

Agricultural waste and residues including sugarcane-bagasse (Siqueira et al. 2013), grasses and corncob (Pointner et al. 2014) have been recognized as feasible substrates particularly for the production of fungal enzymes. Huge amounts of these substrates remain available throughout the year (Wyman et al. 2005) in most of the agricultural countries, including Pakistan (Arshad and Ahmed 2016) and hence can be utilized to develop fermentation industries. The higher contents of cellulose (32–43 % in grasses, 35–45 % in sugarcane-bagasse and 38–69 % in corncob) render them promising substrates for the production of cellulases (Pointner et al. 2014; Siqueira et al. 2013; Ververis et al. 2004).

Although cellulase preparations from Trichoderma species are commercially available, they lack the significant levels of BGL and hence the enzyme system faces feedback inhibition. The enzyme cocktails from Aspergillus species are used alternatively (Gusakov 2011), though with a lower titers but contains higher activities of BGL. Plants cell wall degrading enzymes (CWDE) from members of this genus have been extensively studied and genomic organization of many of the enzymes has been reported (De Vries and Visser 2001) that led to the development of many recombinant strains. Industrially, A. niger is often used for cellulase production while, A. terreus is used in the production of cholesterol lowering drug (Kumar et al. 2014). The production of cellulases from A. terreus has also been reported, but only few studies describing the production of cellulolytic enzymes under SSF of crude LC substrates have appeared so far. Earlier, the production of various enzymes from A. terreus MS105 on banana peels was reported (Rehman et al. 2014). However, in the present work the production of cellulases on grass, sugarcane-bagasse and corn-cob is described.


