


Introduction

Most of the cereals and legumes are rich in carbohydrates and proteins but some of them have certain antinutritional factors which restrict their use in food. One such antinutritional factor is the phytic acid (myo-inositol 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexakisphosphate; IP6) which is the major storage form of phosphorus (60–80 %), in soil (Turner et al. 2002), grains (Lott et al. 2000) and manures from monogastric animals (Barnett 1994). It acts as an antinutrient as it chelates various micronutrients such as Ca2+, Fe2+, and Zn2+ and diminishes their bioavailability in digestive tract of monogastric animals due to lack of enzyme for hydrolysis of phytate complexes (Kumar et al. 2014, 2015). Therefore, consumption of food containing large amount of phytate may cause severe mineral deficiency. The micronutrient deficiency could be alleviated using exogenous phytase addition (Kumar et al. 2015), development of phytase secreting transgenic plants (Brinch-Pedersen et al. 2000), and production of low phytate mutant plants to use in food and feed of the humans (Raboy 2001). Addition of phytase during food processing is most preferred as the other two approaches may lead to decreased seed phytate leading to deleterious effect on germination and decreased agricultural field. Phytases (myo-inositol hexaphophohydrolase; EC. 3.1.3.) are the class of phosphatases which are capable of hydrolysing phytic acid with the release of inorganic phosphorus and divalent cations. So far, many phytases from microbes have been demonstrated to be useful as feed additive in monogastric animals and various phytase preparations are commercially available. None of the commercial phytases investigated, satisfied all of the criteria of an ideal phytase for use in animal feed (Boyce and Walsh 2006). Therefore, most of the research on phytases has been focused on isolation and characterization of novel phytases from different sources (Choi et al. 2001; Greiner and Farouk 2007; Huang et al. 2009; Kumar et al. 2014; Lei et al. 2007). The present study, therefore, was carried out to isolate and screen rhizospheric soil bacterial isolates for extracellular phytase production with suitable biochemical properties and use in food and feed.


