
Abstract

Cross-species transferability is a quick and economic method to enrich SSR database, particularly for minor crops where little genomic information is available. However, transferability of SSR markers varies greatly between species, genera and families of plant species. We assessed confamiliar transferability of SSR markers from cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) and jute (Corchorus olitorius) to 22 species distributed in different taxonomic groups of Malvaceae. All the species selected were potential industrial crop species having little or no genomic resources or SSR database. Of the 14 cotton SSR loci tested, 13 (92.86 %) amplified in G. arboreum and 71.43 % exhibited cross-genera transferability. Nine out of 11 jute SSRs (81.81 %) showed cross-transferability across genera. SSRs from both the species exhibited high polymorphism and resolving power in other species. The correlation between transferability of cotton and jute SSRs were highly significant (r = 0.813). The difference in transferability among species was also significant for both the marker groups. High transferability was observed at genus, tribe and subfamily level. At tribe level, transferability of jute SSRs (41.04 %) was higher than that of cotton SSRs (33.74 %). The tribe Byttnerieae exhibited highest SSR transferability (48.7 %). The high level of cross-genera transferability (>50 %) in ten species of Malvaceae, where no SSR resource is available, calls for large scale transferability testing from the enriched SSR databases of cotton and jute.



Introduction

Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are tandem repeats of short sequences (1–6 nucleotides) distributed throughout genomes, which can be identified through simple polymerase chain reaction (Morgante and Olivieri 1993). SSR markers are locus specific, multi-allelic, codominant and are highly polymorphic in plant and animal species (Wang et al. 2009). By virtue of their locus specificity and high polymorphism, SSRs are considered ideal DNA marker systems for evolutionary analysis, phylogeny reconstruction, genetic mapping and molecular breeding (Kalia et al. 2011). But the primary bottleneck of using SSRs in molecular research is the cost and effort required for designing of specific primers for amplification of locus specific SSRs, which involves sequencing of targeted genomic regions (Squirrell et al. 2003). This has limited the use of SSR markers primarily to species with enriched genomic resources. An alternate useful approach is to search for SSR markers transferable to closely related species or genera, which brings down the cost and time required for SSR development, particularly in species with limited or no genomic information (Peakall et al. 1998). Sequence data obtained from several crop species indicate sufficient homology between genomes in the regions harbouring microsatellites. Recently, comparative genomics in Brassica have shown that microsatellite characteristics in related species are highly similar (Shi et al. 2014). Thus, primer pairs designed on the basis of sequence of one species could be used to develop SSR markers for other related species. Such cross-amplification has been successfully utilized in many crops and their wild relatives for genetic differentiation and evolutionary studies (Sudheer et al. 2011; Tabbasam et al. 2014).

Cross-transferability of SSRs is often more successful between closely related species (Peakall et al. 1998; Balachandran et al. 2013). Limited information is available on confamiliar transferability of SSR markers in plants. Transfer rates of SSRs between genera is approximately 10 % in Eudicots (Barbará et al. 2007), although high transferability between distant genera was observed in some cases (Gutierrez et al. 2005; Rai et al. 2013). But a systematic study to assess efficiency of transferability of SSR markers across different taxonomic orders in plants is limited.

The family Malvaceae harbours over 2300 diverse species belonging to 200 genera, of which only few species, cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.), jute (Corchorus olitorius L.) and cocoa (Theobroma cacao) are industrially important crop species. Cotton is very rich in genomic resources, where more than 5000 SSR markers have been developed (Xiao et al. 2009). Similarly 2469 SSR markers have been developed in jute (Mir et al. 2009). But genomic resources are poor in other Malvaceous species. A good number of potential industrial crops and semi-domesticated species belong to Malvaceae, such as fibre crops like Hibiscus cannabinus (kenaf), Hibiscus acetosella (false roselle), H. vitifolius, Abutilon indicum (Indian mallow), Abroma augustum (Devil’s cotton), Sida spp., Urena lobata; ornamental crops like H. rosa-sinensis (China rose), Alcea rosea (hollyhock), Malvaviscus arboreus (Turk’s Cap), H. mutabilis (cotton rosemallow); and medicinally important species like Wissadula periplocifolia and Abelmoschus moschatus. Genomic resources are scanty in these species; thus cross-species transfer of SSRs from cotton and jute may be better option to develop SSR database in these Malvaceous species. A few recent reports indicate successful transferability of SSRs within same genus in Malvaceae (Bruna et al. 2009; Tabbasam et al. 2014), but these studies are limited to closely related species. We have earlier observed successful intergeneric amplification of genomic SSRs from jute in Hibiscus cannabinus and related wild species (Satya et al. 2013), which indicates the possibility of high SSR transferability in Malvaceae across genera. In the present study, we targeted amplification of SSR markers designed from cotton and jute in diverse Malvaceous genera to compare confamiliar transferability of SSR markers across different taxonomic levels, and also to investigate possibility of developing SSR resources in some minor crop species of Malvaceae through cross-transferability.


