
Abstract

Genetic characterization, diversity analysis and estimate of the genetic relationship among varieties using functional and random DNA markers linked to agronomic traits can provide relevant guidelines in selecting parents and designing new breeding strategies for marker-assisted wheat cultivar improvement. Here, we characterize 20 Moroccan and 19 exotic bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cultivars using 47 functional and 7 linked random DNA markers associated with 21 loci of the most important traits for wheat breeding. The functional marker analysis revealed that 35, 45, and 10 % of the Moroccan cultivars, respectively have the rust resistance genes (Lr34/Yr18/Pm38), dwarfing genes (Rht1b or Rht2b alleles) and the leaf rust resistance gene (Lr68). The marker alleles for genes Lr37/Yr17/Sr38, Sr24 and Yr36 were present only in the exotic cultivars and absent in Moroccan cultivars. 25 % of cultivars had 1BL.1RS translocation. 70 % of the wheat cultivars had Ppo-D1a and Ppo-A1b associated with low polyphenol oxidase activity. 10 % of cultivars showed presence of a random DNA marker allele (175 bp) linked to Hessian fly resistance gene H22. The majority of the Moroccan cultivars were carrying alleles that impart good bread making quality. Neighbor joining (NJ) and principal coordinate analysis based on the marker data revealed a clear differentiation between elite Moroccan and exotic wheat cultivars. The results of this study are useful for selecting suitable parents for making targeted crosses in marker-assisted wheat breeding and enhancing genetic diversity in the wheat cultivars.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0413-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) is an important staple crop, providing 20 % of all calories consumed by people worldwide. Demand for wheat is predicted to increase in the future as the global population increases. With the world’s population estimated to reach 9.6 billion by 2050, wheat production will have a crucial bearing on food security and the global economy in the coming decades. In Morocco, wheat is the most consumed cereal crop, with a per capita consumption of 258 kg annually (USDA Foreign Agricultural Service 2014). In Morocco, it is cultivated in an area of 3.2 million ha, mostly in rainfed conditions with a production of 6.9 million tonnes in 2013 (FAOSTAT 2014). Its productivity is comparatively low, due to abiotic stresses such as drought, and biotic stresses such as Hessian fly, leaf rust, and yellow rust. Consequently, Morocco is not self sufficient in wheat production in most of the years and imports bread wheat for its domestic consumption. Therefore, the overall objectives of wheat breeding remains the development of wheat genotypes with higher yield, higher adapted to contrasted environment, resistance to the biotic stresses and with acceptable higher grain quality. Even all the effort made for improving wheat, its productivity still depends on traditional breeding and selection using conventional techniques. Currently, the Moroccan breeding program is giving a priority to new technologies such as the use of molecular markers to speed up the development of improved wheat varieties.

The characterization of genetic variability and an estimate of the genetic relationship among varieties are essential to any breeding program; because of artificial crosses among less similar parents allow a larger segregation and the combination of different favorable alleles (Bered et al. 2002). Genetic similarities might be evaluated by means of pedigree analysis (Barrett and Kidwell 1998) or by assessing morphological traits (Schut et al. 1997) as well as biochemical (Metakovsky and Branlard 1998) or, more recently, DNA markers (Barrett and Kidwell 1998; Pagnotta et al. 2005). The use of molecular approaches, particularly molecular markers, has allowed better characterization, maintenance of genetic variation in plant germplasm, identifying genes underlying important traits, and devising optimal breeding strategies for crop improvement (Hayden et al. 2010). Therefore, evaluation of the genetic diversity present in wheat germplasm deployed in the current breeding programs at the molecular level and integration of this information into cultivar development are essential for using genetic resources effectively in breeding programs (Chao et al. 2007).

Identification of molecular markers that cosegregate or closely linked with the agronomic traits is useful for marker-assisted selection (MAS; Mohan et al. 1997). Closely linked random DNA markers (RDMs; Andersen and Lubberstedt 2003) and gene specific or functional markers (Andersen and Lubberstedt 2003) are commonly used for MAS. In contrast to random DNA markers, gene specific or functional markers are ideal for MAS in wheat breeding as they are derived directly from the gene conferring the phenotype. In plant breeding, functional markers can be used for validation of cultivar identity, selection of parental materials to build segregating population, and subsequent selection of lines (Lübberstedt et al. 2005). Several markers were developed and validated for MAS. To date, more than 30 wheat loci associated with end-use quality, agronomic traits, and disease resistance in bread wheat (Liu et al. 2012). 56 functional markers for quality traits such as high- and low-molecular-weight glutenin subunits (HMW-GS and LMW-GS), polyphenol oxidase (PPO) activity, lipoxynase (LOX) activity, yellow pigment content (YPC), kernel hardness (Pin), and starch properties have been developed. 27 functional markers for agronomic traits were developed and reportedly used in wheat breeding programs such as semi-dwarfing genes Rht-B1b (Rht1) and Rht-D1b (Rht2), photoperiod response genes (Ppd), vernalization genes (Vrn) and developmental rate genes. For rust disease resistance, six genes Lr34/Yr18/Pm38, Lr37/Yr17/Sr38, Lr19, Lr47, Lr51 and Yr36 had been cloned in wheat (Feuillet et al. 2003; Huang et al. 2003; Yahiaoui et al. 2004; Fu et al. 2009; Krattinger et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2014) in addition to 1B/1R translocation (Froidmont 1998; Chai et al. 2006; Liu et al. 2008) and functional markers were designed and successfully applied in the breeding. The objective of this work was to genotype 20 Moroccan and 19 exotic bread wheat cultivars using 47 functional markers and 7 random DNA markers closely linked to 21 loci of the most important target traits for breeding and to determine the genetic relationship between them to identify the potential parental lines for the wheat breeding programs.


