
Abstract

Rho GTPases activating protein 2 (RGA2) is primarily involved in the modulation of numerous morphological events in eukaryotes. It protects plants by triggering the defense system which restricts the pathogen growth. This is the first report on the isolation, purification and characterization of RGA2 from the stems of Tinospora cordifolia, a medicinal plant. The RGA2 was purified using simple two-step process using DEAE-Hi-Trap FF and Superdex 200 chromatography columns, with a high yield. The purity of RGA2 was confirmed by SDS-PAGE and identified by MALDI-TOF/MS. The purified protein was further characterized for its secondary structural elements using the far-UV circular dichroism measurements. Our purification procedure is simple two-step process with high yield which can be further used to produce RGA2 for structural and functional studies.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0400-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The Rho GTPases activating protein 2 (RGA2), belonging to the superfamily of small G proteins, is found in both higher and lower eukaryotic organisms. These proteins are involved in diverse biological processes such as regulation of actin and microtubule cytoskeleton, cell cycle, vesicle trafficking, cell polarity, and gene expression (Bustelo et al. 2007; Cansado et al. 2010). Enzymatically it has GTPase activity which hydrolyzes the GTP to GDP and inorganic phosphate (Bourne et al. 1991). The activity of RGA2 is positively regulated by GDP-GTP exchange which catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP to activate the switch. However, GTPase-activating proteins stimulate the intrinsic GTPase activity to inactivate the switch and GDP dissociation inhibitors which block spontaneous activation, are considered as a negative regulators (Soto et al. 2010). These regulators are important for the specificity of Rho functions (Villar-Tajadura et al. 2008). These regulators actually modify the signaling activity of the GTPase (de Bettignies et al. 2001).

The plant-specific Rop subfamily of Rho GTPases is very similar to the mammalian Cdc42 and Rac GTPases (de Bettignies et al. 2001). These Rho GTPases play significant roles in the regulation of peroxide-mediated cell death, calcium-dependent pollen tube growth, and other processes in plants (Roumanie et al. 2001; Wu et al. 2000). RGA2 is also found in higher plants where it acts as a small GTPase-associated defensome system for plant immunity (Liu et al. 2015). Furthermore, Rho GTPase activating proteins play important roles in the developmental process (Ye et al. 2014).

Tinospora cordifolia is a well-known Indian medicinal plant and its extract posses immunomodulatory and anticancer activities (Bala et al. 2015) especially against epithelial cancer cells (Maliyakkal et al. 2015). RGA2 has been reported to be purified and characterized from different sources. Yang and Watson reported that cloning, expression and characterization of rho, a ras-related small GTP-binding protein from the garden pea. Matsuda et al. have partially purified a membrane-associated GDP/GTP exchange proteins from the crude synaptic membrane fraction of rat brain using a combination of column chromatographies. RGA2 has been purified from S. pombe which was shown to regulates Rho2-Pck2 interaction and might participates in the regulation of the MAPK cell integrity pathway (Villar-Tajadura et al. 2008). Recently we have purified oligonucleotide binding (OB)-fold protein (Amir et al. 2015a) and Ras-related protein, Rab5a (Amir et al. 2015b) from the stem of Tinospora cordifolia.

In this article we are for the first time reporting the purification and characterization of RGA2, a Rho2 GTPase activating proteins from Tinospora cordifolia. We used a simple chromatographic procedure to get this protein in plenty with high purity. We also performed structural analysis to establish a structure–function relationship.


