


Introduction

Carbonic anhydrase V (CAV) is a mitochondrial enzyme (Dodgson et al. 1980) that catalyzes the hydration of carbon dioxide to produce proton and bicarbonate. CAV exists in two closely related mitochondrial isoform known as carbonic anhydrase VA (CAVA) and CAVB which have a distinct tissue distribution (Imtaiyaz Hassan et al. 2013). CAVB is expressed in the heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, salivary gland and spinal cord (Ghandour et al. 2000), while CAVA is localized in the mitochondria and expressed primarily in the liver (Saarnio et al. 1999). CAVA is actively involved in several biosynthetic processes such as ureagenesis, gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis and helps in glucose (Dodgson and Cherian 1989; Parkkila et al. 1998), fatty acid and urea synthesis (van Karnebeek et al. 2014). CAV is the only mammalian CA which is compartmentalized in a cell organelle and it has tyrosine at 64th position instead of histidine, a catalytic proton shuttle residue which transfers proton from zinc-bound water to buffer (Boriack-Sjodin et al. 1995; Vitale et al. 2007). However, the proton shuttle transport in CAV is still not clear.

CAVA gene was localized to chromosome 16q24.3 and an unprocessed pseudogene has been assigned to 16p12 (Nagao et al. 1995). CAVA gene is composed of 915 nucleotides encoding a 305-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 35-kDa. It has a hydrophobic N-terminal mitochondrial signal sequence of 38 amino acid residues and a catalytic domain of 267-amino acids. Based on the effect of CA inhibitors on these processes, a physiological role of CAVA in the biosynthetic processes has been suggested (Liang et al. 1993; Heck et al. 1994). In fact, mitochondria require CAV for these metabolic processes, and deregulation of this enzyme causes obesity (Arechederra et al. 2013), which is one of the most common human diseases, because of alteration in the metabolic substrate flux (Picard et al. 2000). Inhibition of CAVA has been identified as a novel anti-obesity strategy, over the other because of their serious cardiovascular or central nervous system (CNS) side effects. Several studies have provided insight that inhibition of CAVA with sulfonamide/sulfamate drug has potential as anti-obesity (Kaul and Ritschel 1988). However, better inhibitors are needed to overcome the problem of selectivity, since CAVA share a close homology, with other CA isoform, to design selective inhibitors of CAVA is challenging (Iqbal et al. 2015; Swenson 2014).

We tried to express the full length of CAVA in the bacterial system, but protein was unable to get solubilized. To overcome this problem, we have sub-cloned cDNA of CAVA into expression vector pET21c, encoding a 267-amino acid protein corresponding to the catalytic domain only (801 nucleotides and 30-kDa). Moreover, we have purified CAVA from both soluble supernatant and inclusion bodies (IBs). We further optimized the purification procedure to get the soluble proteins from inclusion bodies which have similar structure and enzyme activity in comparison to the protein purified from the supernatant. The aim of the present study is to construct a prokaryotic expression system for producing recombinant protein which can be used for structure–function studies in future.


