
Abstract

Identification of Nipah virus (NiV) T-cell-specific antigen is urgently needed for appropriate diagnostic and vaccination. In the present study, prediction and modeling of T-cell epitopes of Nipah virus antigenic proteins nucleocapsid, phosphoprotein, matrix, fusion, glycoprotein, L protein, W protein, V protein and C protein followed by the binding simulation studies of predicted highest binding scorers with their corresponding MHC class I alleles were done. Immunoinformatic tool ProPred1 was used to predict the promiscuous MHC class I epitopes of viral antigenic proteins. The molecular modelings of the epitopes were done by PEPstr server. And alleles structure were predicted by MODELLER 9.10. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation studies were performed through the NAMD graphical user interface embedded in visual molecular dynamics. Epitopes VPATNSPEL, NPTAVPFTL and LLFVFGPNL of Nucleocapsid, V protein and Fusion protein have considerable binding energy and score with HLA-B7, HLA-B*2705 and HLA-A2MHC class I allele, respectively. These three predicted peptides are highly potential to induce T-cell-mediated immune response and are expected to be useful in designing epitope-based vaccines against Nipah virus after further testing by wet laboratory studies.



Introduction

Nipah virus (NiV) was isolated in 1999 and was identified as the etiological agent responsible for an outbreak of severe respiratory disease and fatal encephalitis in Malaysia and Singapore in pigs and humans (Chua et al. 1999). During the first NiV outbreak, the virus infected both pigs and humans, in addition to a small number of cats, dogs and horses (Chua et al. 2000; Epstein et al. 2006). NiV, a member of the family Paramyxoviridae, possesses a negative-sense, non-segmented RNA genome that is 18,246 nt (Malaysian isolate) or 18,252 nt (Bangladesh isolate) in length (Harcourt et al. 2005). It has six transcription units that encode six structural proteins, the nucleocapsid (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), fusion protein (F), glycoprotein (G) and polymerase (L). Similar to other paramyxoviruses, the P gene of NiV expresses four proteins, namely P, V, W and C (Harcourt et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2001).

In Bangladesh, 135 probable or confirmed cases of NiV infection in humans were identified from 2001 through 2008; 98 (73 %) were fatal (Luby et al. 2009). Active Nipah virus encephalitis surveillance identified an encephalitis cluster and sporadic cases in Faridpur, Bangladesh, in January 2010. 16 case patients were identified, in which 14 of these patients died (Sazzad et al. 2013).

Vaccination is the most effective of all the medical interventions to save human and animal lives and to increase production (Horzinek 1999; Tang et al. 2012a). Compared to the conventional vaccines, peptide- or epitope-based vaccines are easy to produce, more specific, cost effective, less time consuming and also safe (Kumar et al. 2013). It is well established that T cells play a critical role in inducing cellular immune response against foreign antigens but they recognize antigenic fragments only when they are associated with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules exposed on surface of all vertebrate cells (Shekhar et al. 2012; Mohabatkar and Mohammadzadegan 2007). Immunoinformatics approach uses computational algorithms to predict potential vaccine candidates or T-cell epitopes. The advantage of a peptide- or epitope-based vaccine is the ability to deliver high doses of the potential immunogen and at a low cost (Von Hoff et al. 2005; Tang et al. 2012b). Viral protein which could act as a vaccine candidate must be surface-exposed, antigenic and responsible for pathogenicity (Cerdino-Tarraga et al. 2003; Verma et al. 2011).


