
Abstract

Xylanase is a hemicellulase enzyme that catalyses the hydrolysis of xylan to xylose which is widely used in processing of feed, pulp and paper. It is produced by many microorganisms especially filamentous fungi like Trichoderma and Aspergillus. A potential xylanolytic fungal isolate Aspergillus niger was isolated from forest soils of Tirumala, AP, India, and its crude enzyme was checked for its potential in paper bleaching. Under submerged fermentation, production of xylanase, cellulase, biomass, total protein and sugar released were analysed after 7 days of incubation at room temperature. Maximum enzyme activity was recorded on the fifth day of incubation, biomass after the seventh day, total protein and sugar released on the sixth day of incubation. Enzyme pretreatment of paper reduced 3.5 points in kappa number, 3.1 points increase in brightness and removal of chromophores and hydrophobic compounds. The FTIR and SEM analysis of enzyme-treated sample had shown modification in surface morphology and functional groups. These results clearly demonstrated that the xylanase produced by A. niger was effective as a pulp biobleaching agent which can be used on an industrial scale.



Introduction

Considerable interest has been focused on the use of hydrolytic enzymes like xylanases that degrade xylan components in plant cell walls into simple sugars. Commercial applications of xylanases include pulp bleaching, food and animal feed industries, fuel, textile industries and in water management. They are required in bulk amounts and have significant application in paper and pulp industries as hydrolysis of xylan releases lignin from paper pulp and reduce usage of chemical bleaching agents. Throughout world pulp and paper mill industrial effluents contain toxic and harmful organic compounds as byproducts of pulping and bleaching processes. These effluents contain toxic heavy metals, lignin and its derivatives in addition to colour-imparting phenol and resinous compounds (Valls and Roncero 2009). Dark colour of unbleached pulp is due to the deposition of lignin and to remove colour one or more bleaching sequences like chlorine bleaching, oxidizing or reducing chemicals and alkaline extractions are needed (Khandeparkar and Bhosle 2007; Ziaie-shirkolaee et al. 2008). Due to use of these strong oxidants, chlorinated lignins and phenols are discharged into wastewaters. To substitute chlorine and to implement environmentally sound bleaching sequences by chlorine dioxide, hydrogen peroxide, oxygen, or ozone, among others can be used to get “totally chlorine-free” (TCF) bleaching. The drawback to introduce these environmentally sound technologies in pulp and paper industry is because it is difficult to attain high brightness degree as residual lignin and lignin-derived compounds that are more recalcitrant to degradation in TCF bleaching. To overcome these difficulties, enzymatic biobleaching using xylanases and laccases is an efficient alternative in many industrial applications. The ability of xylanases to facilitate the bleaching of kraft pulp was first reported in 1986 by the Finnish group led by Dr Lisa Viikari. Commercially supplied enzymes like cellulase and xylanase (Jeffries et al. 1994; Pala et al. 2004; Pathak et al. 2011) or lab-scale microbially produced enzymes reported by several researchers are applied to deink various types of papers (Gübitz et al. 1998; Vyas and Lachke 2003; Soni et al. 2010; Singh et al. 2012; Maity et al. 2012).

The application of enzymes like xylanases, cellulases or laccases in paper pulp bleaching is important as they reduce release of pollutants during bleaching and can also enhance the bleaching effect of chemical reagents by affording substantial savings (Valls and Roncero 2009). There are several reports on bioleaching using xylanases or fungal laccases either individually or in combination (Valls and Roncero 2009; Garg et al. 2011; Eugenio et al. 2010; Kapoor et al. 2007). Of late, scientists evinced interest in using filamentous fungi for production of xylanases and cellulases. Among the filamentous fungi, Aspergillus species are one of the most explored organisms. There are reports on xylanase production and application in pulp biobleaching process by many species of Aspergillus which include Aspergillus niger (Khonzue et al. 2011) A. terricola marchal and A. ochraceus (Michelin et al. 2010); A. niger, A. niveus and A. ochraceus (Betini et al. 2009); A. niveus RP05 and A. fumigatus RP04 (Peixoto-Nogueira et al. 2009); A. nidulans and A. awamori (Techapun et al. 2003); A. fumigatus (Savitha et al. 2007), and A. caespitosus (Sandrim et al. 2005). The results from the present study also agree with the existing reports and related results are discussed below. But studies regarding crude cellulase having xylanase activity for deinking and pulp biobleaching are very limited. In view of the industrial importance of xylanase, the present study is focused on evaluation of the extracellular xylanase produced by a potent fungal strain A. niger which is the first report of A. niger from Eastern Ghats and its ability in paper pulp biobleaching.


