
Abstract

Drug-induced nephrotoxicity still hampers drug development, because current translation from in vitro or animal studies to human lacks high predictivity. Often, renal adverse effects are recognized only during clinical stages of drug development. The current study aimed to establish a robust and a more complete human cell model suitable for screening of drug-related interactions and nephrotoxicity. In addition to endogenously expressed renal organic cation transporters and efflux transporters, conditionally immortalized proximal tubule epithelial cells (ciPTEC) were completed by transduction of cells with the organic anion transporter (OAT) 1 or OAT3. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting upon exposure to the OAT substrate fluorescein successfully enriched transduced cells. A panel of organic anions was screened for drug-interactions in ciPTEC-OAT1 and ciPTEC-OAT3. The cytotoxic response to the drug-interactions with antivirals was further examined by cell viability assays. Upon subcloning, concentration-dependent fluorescein uptake was found with a higher affinity for ciPTEC-OAT1 (Km = 0.8 ± 0.1 μM) than ciPTEC-OAT3 (Km = 3.7 ± 0.5 μM). Co-exposure to known OAT1 and/or OAT3 substrates (viz. para-aminohippurate, estrone sulfate, probenecid, furosemide, diclofenac, and cimetidine) in cultures spanning 29 passage numbers revealed relevant inhibitory potencies, confirming the robustness of our model for drug-drug interactions studies. Functional OAT1 was directly responsible for cytotoxicity of adefovir, cidofovir, and tenofovir, while a drug interaction with zidovudine was not associated with decreased cell viability. Our data demonstrate that human-derived ciPTEC-OAT1 and ciPTEC-OAT3 are promising platforms for highly predictive drug screening during early phases of drug development.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1208/s12248-016-9871-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

The renal proximal tubules play a major role in eliminating waste products from the body, including drugs and their metabolites. Their active secretion and reabsorption mechanisms together with biotransformation capacity make proximal tubule cells especially sensitive to drug-induced toxicity and subsequent acute kidney injury (AKI). Not surprisingly, nephrotoxicity is a significant cause for drug attrition during pharmaceutical development, often recognized only during clinical stages of development as translation from in vitro and animal studies to human lacks high predictivity.

An in vitro model with high predictive value for drug-induced nephrotoxicity should closely reflect the in vivo processes involved in renal drug handling. More specific, a robust cell-based model should include a proximal tubule epithelium stably expressing a broad range of functional transporters and metabolic enzymes that act in concert in renal drug elimination. This process may be affected in concomitant drug treatment, leading to clinically relevant drug-drug interactions (DDI). The renal elimination mechanism of xenobiotics can roughly be divided into two major pathways, viz. the organic anion and the organic cation system. As a first step in elimination of organic anions in humans, active tubular uptake is mediated by the organic anion transporter 1 (OAT1; SLC22A6) and organic anion transporter 3 (OAT3; SLC22A8) present at the, blood-facing, basolateral side. These transporters are characterized by their high affinity and capacity and, as a consequence, are major players in the development of drug-induced nephrotoxicity. After uptake, secretion of anionic compounds into the tubular lumen is facilitated by apically expressed efflux transporters, such as the multidrug resistance proteins 2 and 4 (MRP2 and -4; ABCC2 and -4) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP; ABCG2). In parallel, renal elimination of organic cations in the human proximal tubular epithelium is facilitated by basolateral uptake, predominantly via the organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2; SLC22A2), and apical efflux via multidrug and toxin extrusion proteins 1 and 2-K (MATE1 and -2-K; SLC47A1 and -2) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp; ABCB1).

Renal drug transporters demonstrate a large overlap in substrate specificity, introducing redundancy in uptake mechanisms of proximal tubule cells, and contributing to the relative high sensitivity of the tissue. This especially counts for organic anions, as this class comprises the majority of drugs that are excreted by the kidneys. Drug-induced nephrotoxicity related to the proximal tubular epithelium by this class of compounds have been described broadly, including for the acyclic nucleotide phosphonates adefovir, cidofovir, and tenofovir. These antiretroviral compounds are used for treatment of HIV, hepatitis B, and cytomegalovirus infections and function as nucleotide analog reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTIs). The exact mechanism of antiviral-induced renal toxicity is still under debate, but the involvement of OATs in the uptake of many antivirals has been widely acknowledged (15–17). To prevent NtRTI-induced nephrotoxicity, their uptake can be inhibited by co-administration of an OAT1 inhibitor, such as probenecid. As with many other diseases, current antiviral therapy in HIV infections is based on polypharmacy. Increased plasma concentrations and systemic toxicity have been observed with didanosine co-administration of tenofovir in anti-HIV triple therapy, possibly by DDI at the site of OAT1 that limited renal excretion. Together, polypharmacy can optimize the life-span of infected patients, but this strategy simultaneously increases the risk for DDI and demands for personalized evaluation of the benefit/risk ratio for each drug.

The aim of this study was to establish a robust human cell model that allows prediction of drug-induced nephrotoxicity and DDI of organic anions, with a focus on antivirals. We evaluated conditionally immortalized proximal tubule epithelial cells (ciPTEC) as a preclinical in vitro prediction model. This model already demonstrated to be highly predictive for studying DDI at the site of OCT2 and to endogenously exhibit metabolic enzymes together with a panel of functional efflux transporters. However, the expression of OAT1 and OAT3 was rapidly lost in culture. Here, these transporters were stably expressed in ciPTEC by transduction, followed by an elegant selection procedure using OAT transporter functionality, completing the relevant renal xenobiotic transporters in ciPTEC. The function of both transporters appeared to be stable upon prolonged culturing. These unique characteristics of the presented OAT containing human cell lines allowed screening for DDI using known pharmacological OAT1 and OAT3 substrates and/or inhibitors. Upon validation, we demonstrated that OAT-mediated uptake in ciPTEC are key determinants in antiviral-induced cytotoxicity. These findings underscore that ciPTEC-OAT1 and ciPTEC-OAT3 are valuable tools for drug-induced toxicity screening.



DISCUSSION

To improve prediction of the nephrotoxic potential of novel chemical entities and to mechanistically understand the pathways associated with drug-induced toxicity, highly predictive and validated translational models are required. In the present report, we describe such a robust human-based cell model with intact proximal tubular characteristics. Stable OAT1 and OAT3 expression in the human renal cell line ciPTEC allowed studying reproducible DDI for a panel of model substrates and antiviral compounds. Functional OAT1 and OAT3 transport activity was demonstrated to be associated with drug-induced toxicity of the antivirals adefovir, cidofovir, and tenofovir. These findings indicate that our model predicts drug-induced nephrotoxicity and underscore that functional expression of influx transporters is pivotal in prediction of drug-induced renal toxicity.

Many reports related to studying drug-OAT interactions describe the use of non-polarized overexpression systems, such as Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, the human cervical epitheloid carcinoma cell line HeLa, or human epithelial kidney (HEK) 293 cells, which are highly relevant for studying interactions at the single-transporter level but might have a poor overall predictivity due to their simplicity. Since proximal tubule cells are the main site of adverse drug effects in the kidney, this cell type is preferred for in vitro assays investigating drug-induced nephrotoxicity. Human primary proximal tubule cells reflect in vivo toxicological responses best, but lack reproducibility and robustness due to high donor-to-donor variability and limited availability. Moreover, primary cells lose their proximal tubular phenotype upon culturing, and OAT1-4, P-glycoprotein, and MRP expressions were found to be rapidly decreased. To extend the life span of human proximal tubular cells and to provide a robust model for drug screening, we and others have immortalized primary kidney cells, yet without demonstrating functional OATs, despite retained gene expressions.

The current study demonstrates the first human model with stable expression of OAT1 and OAT3 for up to 10 and 11 passages, respectively, as analyzed by qPCR and functionality of OAT1 and OAT3 for up to 29 passages as analyzed by fluorescein uptake. Experimental values obtained for DDI of model compounds correlated well with published data, confirming PAH has a higher inhibitory potency for OAT1 compared to OAT3, whereas the inhibitory potencies of estrone sulfate, probenecid, and furosemide were clearly higher for OAT3. The IC50 value of cimetidine in ciPTEC-OAT1 is, however, more than fivefold higher as described earlier, whereas ciPTEC-OAT3 inhibition by cimetidine was found well within predetermined ranges. This discrepancy may be explained by different substrates used in the studies, where the OAT1-substrate PAH used in earlier studies, has a lower affinity for OAT1 as compared to fluorescein used in the current study. Since tetracyclin-inducible expression of OAT1 and OAT3 in ciPTEC was not achieved, we hypothesize that random integration of the vector could have caused silencing of this particular promoter element. The effects of prototypic inhibitor compounds on drug transport are promising with respect to the application of ciPTEC as a tool to study drug-induced nephrotoxicity, and the proof-of-concept was evaluated further with a selected a panel of clinically relevant antivirals with various pharmacokinetic parameters.

DDIs are a major concern in anti-HIV therapy that includes co-administration of multiple antivirals. We evaluated adefovir, cidofovir, tenofovir, and zidovudine DDI at the site of OAT1 and OAT3. The affinities of adefovir, cidofovir, and tenofovir were higher for OAT1 than for OAT3, in agreement with previous studies in CHO cells overexpressing hOAT1 and hOAT3. The DDI index has been used to determine the potential of clinical DDI and drug-induced toxicities and allows extrapolating in vitro observations to the clinical setting. In our study, IC50 values of less than 10 times the maximal free plasma concentration (Cmax,u/IC50 > 0.1) were found for adefovir, cidofovir, and zidovudine, indicating these antivirals are likely to inhibit OAT1 and OAT3 at clinically relevant concentrations.

Antiviral-induced nephrotoxicity was shown to be associated with OAT-mediated uptake and further evaluated in the current study. We demonstrated that OAT1 or OAT3 expression is required for induction of toxicity by adefovir, cidofovir, and tenofovir in ciPTEC. The relation between OAT1 transporter affinity and toxicity was described earlier using HeLa cells, transiently expressing hOAT1, in which cidofovir showed a higher affinity as well as a higher toxicity compared to tenofovir. In agreement, when the cytotoxic potential of NtRTIs in ciPTEC-OAT1 at 72 h of exposure was ranked, we found that cidofovir has the highest potency over tenofovir and adefovir. On the other hand, the low potency of adefovir in our study contrasts to the cytotoxicity reported for other cell models. In general, the toxic potency of the antivirals in ciPTEC is lower as compared to hOAT1-CHO and HEK-OAT1, which may be due to the presence of functional metabolic enzymes and an intact efflux machinery in ciPTEC. RNA expression of phase I enzymes CYP3A4, CYP4A11, and several UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) in ciPTEC were found to be comparable to their expression levels in primary PTEC. Protein expression of the efflux transporters Pgp and MRP4 was demonstrated, as well as functional efflux transport activity of Pgp, MRP4, and BCRP. From these findings, we conclude that ciPTEC closely reflects the physiological situation, suggesting that our model is of higher predictive value than single overexpression systems. Since MRP4 mediates the efflux of tenofovir, its functional presence in ciPTEC might explain the reduced cytotoxicity in our model as compared to overexpression systems lacking this transporter. Future research should clarify this.

Activity of phase I and phase II metabolizing enzymes was demonstrated in ciPTEC of which the UGT2B7 subfamily might have been the cause of the tolerance for zidovudine observed in the present study. While adefovir, cidofovir, and tenofovir are largely excreted unchanged by the kidneys, only 23% of zidovudine is eliminated via the urine without metabolic alterations. Zidovudine undergoes either phase II metabolism into the non-toxic 5’-zidovudine-O-glucuronide or the antiviral is phosphorylated resulting in mitochondrial toxicity. As both glucuronidation and phosphorylation take place at the same functional group of zidovudine (5’-OH), the low toxicity of zidovudine suggests a favor for glucuronidation in ciPTEC. Although glucuronidation predominantly takes place in the liver, UGT2B7 expression in ciPTEC might contribute to zidovudine detoxification. Moreover, the toxic side effects of nucleoside analogs have been correlated with the kinetics of incorporation by the mitochondrial DNA polymerase, ranking zidovudine less toxic than tenofovir. As efflux inhibition of MRP4 and BCRP did not further reduce viability of ciPTEC upon exposure with zidovudine, the toxicity of this compound is likely not influenced by these efflux transporters. Differences in expression of metabolic enzymes and transporter activities between various cell lines used for toxicity studies should be taken into account when comparing functional readout parameters. Moreover, the broad presence of metabolic enzymes and transporters in our model as well as in freshly isolated PTECs increases their predictive potential, but complicates comparison with more simple models. Taken together, the combined expression of efflux transporters (MRP4, BCRP, MATE2-K, and Pgp) with influx transporters (OAT1/3, OCT2, and SLCO4C1) and metabolic enzymes make ciPTEC suitable to study multiple steps involved in renal elimination and drug-induced nephrotoxicity.

The clinical relevance and impact on drug safety of OAT transporters are well acknowledged by regulatory authorities and the pharmaceutical industry. Both the FDA and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) have issued guidance documents, outlining that OAT interactions should be studied for new compounds. Furthermore, the International Transporter Consortium (ITC) provided decision trees to determine whether a drug candidate may be a substrate (victim) or an inhibitor (perpetrator) of transporters involved in clinically relevant DDI. Consequently, pharmaceutical industry started a quest for reliable and high-throughput in vitro models that mimic the human kidney with improved prediction of drug-induced nephrotoxicity and a decrease in use of animals in research. Current preclinical tests for prediction of nephrotoxicity are mainly based on animal (rodent) models. These models provide information about systemic toxicity in living organisms, but they bear high costs, are time intensive, and remain an ethical issue. Their clinical predictive value is limited due to inherent interspecies differences in drug disposition and emphasizes the urgent need for human-based models that closely resemble the human kidney physiology. Current innovations in in vitro models allowing cells to grow in polarized structures under flow conditions, in combination with high-throughput automated systems for toxicity read-outs, will become major steps forward in drug safety screening, for which the ciPTEC model may provide a suitable cellular basis. In general, application of ciPTEC as a predictive tool for drug-induced toxicity requires comparison with freshly isolated PTECs and further validation by extrapolation of in vitro data to clinical outcomes.
