
Abstract

Cutinases are hydrolytic enzymes which catalyzes esterification and trans-esterification reactions that make them highly potential industrial biocatalyst. In the present investigation microorganisms showing cutinase activity were isolated from plant samples. The strain showing maximum cutinase activity was identified by 18S rDNA sequencing as Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct and was selected for further studies. To achieve maximum enzyme production, the medium components affecting cutinase production were screened by Plackett–Burman followed by central composite design. The results obtained suggested that cutin, temperature and CaCl2 have influenced the cutinase production significantly with very high confidence levels. Cutinase production was maximum (663 U/mg protein) when using cutin prepared from orange peel as sole source of carbon. An overall 4.33-fold increase in the production of cutinase was observed after optimization of culture conditions (including 2.5-fold increase using RSM) during 24 h of incubation. The production time of Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct cutinase is significantly lower than the most of the earlier reported cutinase-producing fungus.



Introduction

The cuticle protects the leaves, fruits and other softer parts of plant from dehydration and it acts as the outermost barrier in plant parts to infestation by pathogens. The major constituent of the cuticle is insoluble lipid polyester called cutin, which primarily consists of hydroxylated 16- and 18-carbon fatty acids that are linked together via ester bonds. Cutinase/cutin hydrolase (3.1.1.74) secreted by phytopathogenic microorganisms are inducible in nature and are capable of degrading cutin polymers of plant cell wall (Purdy and Kolattukudy 1975). These enzymes are widely distributed in animals, plants and microorganisms. Cutinases have attracted attention of researchers because of the fact that they do not require any cofactors, are fairly stable, catalyzes both hydrolysis and synthetic reactions and are even active in organic solvents. These are versatile enzymes showing several interesting properties which have potential industrial applications (Macedo and Pio 2005). In the food industry, cutinases have been used as important catalyst to produce dehydrated fruits, dairy products, flavoring compounds and some important fatty acids such as eicosapentanoic acid (EPA) and docosahexanoic acid (DHA) (Dutta et al. 2009). These enzymes have been also used to degrade various insoluble polymer films like poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PETP) and poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) (Murphy et al. 1996; Liu et al. 2009; Korpecka et al. 2010; Greimel et al. 2013). X-ray crystallographic studies of F. solani pisi cutinase have revealed that a catalytic triad Ser-His-Asp is located in its active site (Egmond and Vlieg 2000). Fungal cutinases can hydrolyse not only cutin, but also insoluble triglycerides as well as soluble esters such as p-nitrophenyl butyrate (p-NPB). Thus, fungal cutinases are considered as being intermediate between lipases and esterases (Carvalho et al. 1999; Longhi and Cambillau 1999).

In the present investigation, optimization of culture conditions for enhanced production of cutinase from Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct isolated from plant material has been carried out.



Discussion

The present study envisages isolation and screening of cutinase-producing fungi and optimization of culture conditions for cutinase production. Morphological studies, spore staining and 18S rDNA analysis of selected isolate showed that it belonged to the genus Aspergillus and named as Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct. Different species of this genus, i.e., A. niger (Nyyssola et al. 2013), A. nidulans (Castroochoa et al. 2012), A. oryzae (Liu et al. 2009) have been reported to harbor cutinase activity. Previously cutinases have been isolated from various microorganisms including bacteria (Purdy and Kolattukudy 1975; Chen et al. 2007) and fungi (Fett et al. 1992, 1999).

To harness the maximal potential of a microorganism for the synthesis of desired metabolite/product, it is very important to optimize the cultural parameters. Cultivation of Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct in medium M1 resulted in increased cutinase production (164 ± 4.5 U/mg protein) as compared to initial screening media used for the assessment of cutinase activity (153 ± 3.0 U/mg protein). Further increase in cutinase production to 261 ± 3.0 U/mg protein was observed when medium was supplemented with orange cutin. Earlier apple cutin was used for the production of extracellular cutinase in F. solani pisi. (Purdy and Kolattukudy 1975; Degani et al. 2006), whereas tomato cutin was used for cutinase production in Pseudomonas cepacia NRRL B-2320 (Fett et al. 1992). Most of the reported cutinases showed highest cutinase production in minimal medium supplied with cutin (Chen et al. 2013). Cutin was used as a carbon source or an inducer for achieving high level of cutinase yield (Chen et al. 2007; Fett et al. 2000; Lin and Kolattukudy 1978). Without supplementation of cutin in culture medium, this fungus did not show cutinase activity which indicated inducible nature of its cutinase.

The production of cutinase is influenced by the type and concentration of carbon and nitrogen sources, culture pH, temperature and dissolved oxygen concentration (Du et al. 2007). Different operational variables interact and influence their respective effect on response, thus it is worthwhile to use an experimental design that could account for these interactions (Coninck et al. 2004; Dasu and Panda 2000; Kumar et al. 2009). Cutinase production was the result of a synergistic combination of all the parameters on the microorganism in the culture. Therefore, optimization of cultural conditions was done using response surface methodology. An overall 4.33-fold increase in the production of cutinase was observed after optimization of culture conditions (including 2.5-fold increase using RSM). The formulation of the culture medium using experimental planning, the best results were obtained for cutinase production (663 U/mg protein) in medium containing: KH2PO4 0.5 g, K2HPO4 2.5 g, NaCl 0.1 g, MgSO4 0.2 g, CaCl2 0.5 g, FeSO4 0.03 g, cutin 2.5 g/l with pH 7.0 and temperature 35 °C, inoculated with an aliquot of 2.11 × 107 spores/ml for 24 h. Most of the cutinase-producing fungal strains i.e., T. vulgaris, T. fusca, S. badius, F. oxysporium had longer production time of 96, 168, 336 and 72 h, respectively (Chen et al. 2013). Calcium chloride was observed as one of the significant factor in medium formulation, as it leads to highly branched hyphae and numerous bulbous cells in Aspergillus sp. (Pera and Callieri 1997). Earlier, central composite design has been applied to optimize P. cepacia NRRL B 2320 cutinase which resulted in twofold increase in enzyme activity, i.e., 336 µmol/min/ml (Dutta et al. 2013). Cutinase production by Fusarium oxysporum also showed twofold (22.68 µmol/min/ml) increase in enzyme activity when optimized using RSM-based design with flax seed oil used as a substrate (Dutta et al. 2013).

Cutinases are important enzymes, but there are some limiting factors in their production e.g., unavailability of commercial pure cutin, which is used as both substrate and inducer for the production of these enzymes.
