
Abstract

Flubendiamide, as a new class (Phthalic acid diamide) of pesticide with a wide spectrum of activity against lepidopteran pests extensively used alone or in combination with other insecticides in agriculture system to get protection from insect pests. Due to high specificity and limited approach towards non-target organism, the extensive use of this pesticide as an alternate for organophosphate and organochlorine pesticides, causing an eventual increase in environmental pollution. Five flubendiamide-resistant bacterial strains were isolated during the present study from agriculture soil considering previous history of pesticide application. Minimal inhibitory concentration of all the isolates showed strain SSJ1 was most efficient flubendiamide resistant organism. Biochemical tests and molecular sequencing of 16s rRNA was carried out which confirmed the isolate as Chryseobacterium indologenes strain SSJ1. UV–visible spectrophotometer study revealed that 89.06 % initial pesticide was removed by the isolate at optimum temperature of 35 °C and pH 7.0 with 5 days incubation period and is further confirmed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis. Results of the present study however, suggest strain SSJ1 is most resistant to flubendiamide and can possibly be applied in the bioremediation of flubendiamide contaminated soils.



Introduction

Pesticides pose wide variety of disturbances in aquatic as well as terrestrial organisms, which include morphological, behavioural or physiological disturbances (Xing et al. 2012; Mansour and Mossa 2011; David et al. 2012). These xenobiotics, however, enter food chain and gain access into humans through biomagnifications (Ellgehausen et al. 1980) thereby affecting physiological activities. Indiscriminate use of these pesticides renders a greater threat to living organisms as well as environmental sustainability. Many studies were undertaken which confirm the neurological, physiological disturbances due to pesticide toxicity (David et al. 2015).

Recent years, formulating a new class of chemical with a potential for acting on specific pest posing no harm to non-targeted organism was of prime importance. One such Phthalic acid diamide class of pesticide flubendiamide (C23H22F7IN2O4S) was reported to be effective against a broad spectrum of lepidopteran insect pest with a relatively low toxicity to non-targeted organisms (Sarkar et al. 2014). This formulation works by disrupting ion channels and thereby paralysing the muscle fibres of the gut (Nishimatsu et al. 2005), therefore, the larvae stops feeding and eventually dies from starvation (Ebbinghaus-Kintscher et al. 2006). Flubendiamide is been widely used in Indian agriculture system for cultivation of rice and cotton, to get protection from pests (Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 2009). Apart from these two crops, this pesticide is also been used in the cultivation of fruiting vegetables, stone fruit, corn, cotton, grape, okra, tobacco, etc. (EPA 2010).

Even though precisely targeted formulations of flubendiamide are expected to be safe for non-target organisms, yet, several recent studies have shown toxic potentials of flubendiamide on many non-target organisms. Neurotoxic potentials and morphological anomalies in drosophila melanogaster have been reported (Sarkar et al. 2014). Acute and joint toxicity of flubendiamide was reported by Wei et al. on Chinese tiger frog Hoplobatrachus chinensis tadpoles. Alterations in protein metabolism of fresh water fish Labeo rohita have been reported by Nirmalakallagadda and Rathnamma. Disruption of enzyme activity in tropical soil after flubendiamide application was reported (Shrinivas and David 2015). These findings not only provide enough scientific evidences for flubendiamide toxicity to non-target organisms, and also is undesirable with ecological perspective, and furthermore, its fate as serious environmental pollutant.

Present study aims to explore the available means of detoxifying this pesticide using possible ways. One such economic and eco-friendly way of achieving this is by bioremediation using native microorganisms. Bioremediation is a process of cleaning up of contaminated soils using biological means. This process ultimately aims towards forcing these native microbial populations to use contaminant (pesticide) as a source of carbon and nutrient for their growth and development (Islas-garcia et al. 2015). Furthermore, it is necessary to perform physicochemical characterisation of contaminated soil in order to find out whether the native microbial species is capable of degrading the pesticide by biostimulation. However, unfortunately, there is no literature available so far for the bioremediation of flubendiamide in submerged culture by native bacteria. Hence, the present work was carried out in order to attempt isolation of flubendiamide resistant bacteria from the contaminated soil and to evaluate the potentials of these isolates in degrading the pesticide. These bacterial isolates could then be used in future to ward off or to limit the concentration of flubendiamide in agriculture systems thereby preventing them from reaching non-target organisms.


