


Introduction

Nearly two-third of commercial proteases are produced by fungal species, yeasts and bacteria (Wang et al. 2013). Proteases have diverse applications in various industries, such as, food, pharmaceuticals, silk and diagnostics with predominant use in detergent and leather industries (Banik and Prakash 2004; Gupta et al. 2002). The demand for industrial enzymes, particularly of microbial origin, is ever increasing owing to their applications in wide variety of processes. Proteases represent one of the three largest groups of industrial enzymes and account for about 60 % of the total worldwide sale of the enzymes (Rajkumar et al. 2011).

Proteases are broadly classified as endo or exoenzymes on the basis of their site of action on protein substrates. They are further categorized as serine proteases, aspartic proteases, cysteine proteases or metalloproteases depending on their catalytic mechanism (Geethanjali and Subash 2011). Alkaline serine proteases of microbial origin possess considerable industrial potential due to their biochemical diversity and wide applications in tannery, food industries, medicinal formulations, detergents and processes like waste treatment, silver recovery and resolution of amino acid mixtures (Agarwal et al. 2004).

Bacillus species are specific producers of extracellular protease. Several alkaline proteases have been purified and characterized from many Bacillus strains (Rao et al. 1998). Subtilisin Carlsberg produced by Bacillus liceniformis (Jacobs et al. 1985) and Subtilisin Novo produced by Bacillus amyloliquefaciens (Wells et al. 1983) have been the enzymes of choice for detergent industries. These enzymes exhibit maximum activity at alkaline pH values ranging from 8 to 10 (Horikoshi 1999). Generally the alkaline proteases for detergent applications should be active at temperature higher than 40–50 °C and pH in the range of 9–12 (Sellami-Kamoun et al. 2008; Hadder et al. 2009).

The purification process also increases the specific activities of enzymes, making them more specific for industrial applications. In the present study, we report purification and characterization of a thermotolerant alkaline serine protease produced by a novel species, Bacillus caseinilyticus.


