
Abstract

The application of pesticides in agricultural fields not only reaches the target pests but also with soil where it interacts with soil microorganisms resulting in change of microbial diversity. Chlorpyrifos (CP) is one such organophosphorous insecticide most widely used against various insects, termites, and beetles throughout the globe. In the present work, the effect of CP on soil microbial population was assessed by the cultivable method. The fertile soil which does not have a history of any pesticide application was treated with 100 and 200 µg/g of CP along with control which received only sterile water and incubated for 1, 7, and 14 days. The soil amended with the insecticide showed decrease in the number of colony forming units (CFU) of bacteria and fungi. However, Streptomyces sp. HP-11 which tolerated high concentration and also inhibited fungal population was further selected for biodegradation studies. After 14 days of incubation in Mineral salt media (MSM), the strain HP-11 biotransformed CP into 3, 5, 6-trichloro-2-pyridinol (TCP) and Diethyl Phosphorothioate (DETP), and its formation was confirmed by the m/z peak of LC–MS analysis, which was later metabolized to unknown polar metabolites. The results obtained highlights that the application of chlorpyrifos favored the Actinomycete growth in the soil, thereby inhibiting other microorganisms and the strain HP-11 harbors metabolic pathway for detoxification of CP and its hydrolysis product TCP into polar metabolites, thus suggesting the strain HP-11 will be a potential bioaugmenting agent for the bioremediation of chlorpyrifos contaminated soil and water.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0462-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Pesticides are the synthetic compounds used to protect agricultural crops from disease causing pests. The applied pesticide will reach target pests by only 1 % and the remaining will come into contact with soil, where they undergo a variety of transformations that provide a complex pattern of metabolites (Andreu and Pico 2004). Fertility of soil is dependent on the soil microbial richness and diversity. As a natural decomposers, microorganisms enrich the soil nutrients, and improve soil texture and water holding capacity. Researchers have shown that the pesticides are always having their effect on the soil microorganisms. Some pesticides stimulate the growth of soil microorganisms and some have depressive effects or no effects. However, the relationship of different structures of pesticides on the growth of soil microorganisms is not easily predictable (Lo 2010).

Organophosphorous (OPs) insecticides are ester or thiol derivatives of phosphoric acid, whose mode of action is through the inhibition of enzyme Acetylcholinesterase, which is responsible for nerve transmission. Chlorpyrifos [O,O-diethyl O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridyl phosphorothiote)] is an important OPs insecticide, widely used against a broad spectrum of agricultural crops throughout the world at concentration of 3 to 15 kg/ha (Singh and Walker 2006). The extensive usage of chlorpyrifos having a half life from 10 to 120 days in soil has resulted in widespread environmental contamination affecting beneficial non-target soil microorganisms (Li et al. 2008).

Biotransformation is a process of modifying or cleavage of chemical structure of a parental molecule of an organism resulting in various metabolites depending on mechanism adopted by specific organisms. Biological systems, such as microorganisms, have been used to biotransform or detoxify pesticides. There are many reports on the biotransformation of chlorpyrifos into other metabolites. One such metabolite resulting from hydrolysis is 3,5,6-tichloro-2-pyridinol (TCP) having a half life of 65–360 days (Briceno et al. 2012; Das and Adhta 2015; Singh et al. 2004). However, TCP is an antimicrobial metabolite which inhibits the proliferation of microorganisms in the soil and also prevents its own degradation by microorganisms and chlorpyrifos degradation (Racke 1993). Environmental protection agency (EPA) of the USA has listed TCP as a potential endocrine disrupting chemical (US EPA. 2009). Hence, there is a need of detoxify this pollutant from the environment. Alcaligens faecalies (Yang et al. 2005), Enterobacter sp. (Singh et al. 2003), Pseudomonas nitroreducens PS-2 (Korade and Fulekar 2009), Serratia sp. (Xu et al. 2007), Sphingomonas sp. (Li et al. 2007), and Stenotrophomonas sp. (Yang et al. 2006) all these are the papers which reports the diversity of microbes capable of complete mineralization of chlorpyrifos without the formation of TCP.

The current work was carried out to assess the effect of chlorpyrifos on soil microbial diversity and biotransformation of chloropyrifos using pure microbial isolate.



Discussion

The applied insecticide persists in the soil for long periods and has negative impacts on soil microbial flora, killing or inhibiting certain specific groups of microorganisms (Araujo et al. 2003). In the present work, the response of soil microorganisms to Chlorpyrifos treatment at 100 and 200 µg/g concentrations was variable in alteration in microbial diversity of dominant Actinomycete species. The large numbers of microorganisms inhibited were fungi, due to the formation of e TCP through hydrolysis by Streptomyces sp. HP-11. This is to our knowledge is the first report that describes the effect of chlorpyrifos on soil fungal diversity. The application of chlorpyrifos favored Actinomycete growth, thereby inhibiting other microorganisms. However, Martinez-Toledo et al. had shown that Chlorpyrifos at concentration 10–300 µg/g significantly decreased aerobic dinitrogen fixing bacteria and also dinitrogen fixation but no effect on fungi and denitrifying bacteria. This may be due to pesticides, application results in decrease in certain groups of soil microorganisms and also increase in the population of certain resistant and dominant microorganisms, Kalia and Gosal.

Detoxification of chlorpyrifos in soil and aquatic environments using microorganisms is a viable option with its eco-friendliness, high efficiency and cost effectiveness (Dhanya 2014). For successful bioremediation of contaminated site, customized bioaugmenting agent is well required (Tyagi et al. 2011). However, there are only few reports, which show effective biodegradation of TCP. Lakshmi et al. reported biotransformation of chlorpyrifos (92 %) by Pseudomonas aeroginosa, where TCP was the major metabolite after 20 days of incubation and disappeared after 30 days by forming unknown polar metabolites. Similarly, fungal isolate Cladosporium cladosporioids Hu-01 isolated from activated sludge, biotransformed CP into TCP in 5 days, and later disappeared quickly (Chen et al. 2012). Ralstonia sp. metabolized 100 mg/l TCP within 12 h and 700 mg/l in 80 h by forming 3,6-dihydroxypyridine-2-dione as the green metabolite (Li et al. 2010). Paracoccus sp.TRP could utilize both CP and TCP as the sole carbon and nitrogen source resulting in complete mineralization (Xu et al. 2008). Our strain HP-11 which tolerated high concentration and also inhibited other groups of fungi was also able to biotransform CP into TCP and DETP after 14 days incubation in MSM media, which later disappeared into unknown polar metabolites. This result is similar to the previous findings (Abraham et al. 2013), where the Actinobacterial strain Gordonia sp.JAAS1 was able to degrade 110 mg/l of Chlorpyrifos within 24 h of incubation by forming TCP which finally degraded into DETP after 72 h, and Bacillus Subtilis Y242 isolated from agricultural waste water was able to degrade 95.2 % of 150 mg/l of Chlorpyrifos within 48 h, where 3,5,6-trichloro-2-methoxypyridine (TMP) was major transformed product (El-Helow et al. 2013).
