
Abstract

Therapeutic potential of medicinal plants as a source of noble natural anti-oxidants and anti-microbial agents has been well recognised all across the globe. In this study, phenolic compounds, in vitro anti-oxidant activity and anti-microbial properties have been investigated in five Himalayan medicinal plants, (e.g., Acorus calamus, Habenaria intermedia, Hedychium spicatum, Roscoea procera and Valeriana jatamansi) in different solvent systems. R. procera exhibited significantly (p < 0.05) higher phenolics; while H. spicatum was rich in flavonoids and V. jatamansi in anti-oxidant activity. Also, R. procera and H. spicatum were found rich in gallic acid; V. jatamansi in catechin, hydroxylbenzoic acid and caffeic acid and H. intermedia in hydroxyl benzoic acid. Solvent systems showed species specific response for extraction of total flavonoids and anti-oxidant activity. All the extracts were found effective against different bacterial and fungal strains in a dose dependent manner and maximum antimicrobial activity was found in R. procera as compared to other species. All the plant extracts showed greater activity against bacterial strains as compared to fungal strains. The results of this study suggest that extract of these species can be used as natural anti-oxidant to reduce free radical mediated disorders and as natural alternative for food preservation.





Discussion

This is a systematic investigation on anti-oxidant and anti-microbial potential of selected edible and ethno-therapeutically important medicinal plants of west Himalaya (i.e., H. spicatum, R. procera, H. intermedia, V. jatamansi and A. calamus), which justify their role in food preservative and reported their ethno-therapeutic uses. Although reports on anti-oxidant activity in some of these species are available but the anti-microbial activity of R. procera and H. intermedia against bacterial and fungal strain is reported for the first time. Similarly, extract of H. spicatum was tested first time against some pathogenic bacterial strains, such as, B. subtitis and M. luteus. While, the study on anti-oxidant activity of H. intermedia is first of its kind.

Among all the selected species, total phenolic and flavonoid content were relatively higher in R. procera extract, which suggested its comparative advantage over other species for anti-oxidant rich formulations. R. procera is used in preparation of anti-oxidant rich polyherbal formulation ‘Astavarga’ along with H. intermedia and 6 other medicinal herbs, which is well recognized for strengthening vital force of the body, cell regeneration capacity and immunity system (Rawat et al. 2014). However, previous report showed lower value of total phenolic content in R. procera (methanolic extract = 2.92 mg GAE/g dw; Rawat et al. 2014). This might be due to the difference in extraction methods and collection from different geographic locations with different genetic make-up. The process of heat incubation used in this study provides aglycosylation of bounded phenolic compounds into their free forms (Wojdylo et al. 2007). Phenolic and flavonoid content in V. jatamansi are in agreement with the previous findings, which showed phenolic content (12.79 mg GAE/g dw) and flavonoids (4.19 mg QE/g dw), in methanolic extract of wild individuals of the species (Bhatt et al. 2012; Jugran et al. 2013). However, this is contrary with the finding of Kalim et al. who reported higher values of total phenolic (73.13 mg GAE/g) and flavonoids content (74.32 mg QAE/g) in the 50 % methanolic extract of V. jatamansi. In case of H. spicatum, comparable total phenolic content (2.83–4.69 mg GAE/g) has been reported in methanolic extract of different samples collected from various geographic regions of Uttarakhand, in west Himalaya (Rawat et al. 2011). Likewise, a comparable value of total phenolic content (4.90 mg GAE/g dw) was observed in methanolic extract of A. calamus (Surveswaran et al. 2007; Bahukhandi et al. 2013). This study, therefore, indicates that most of the phenolic content present in the species are extractable in solvents with moderate polarity, such as, methanol, ethanol and acetone. Reports about total phenol and anti-oxidant activity in rhizome part of A. calamus are also available (Wojdylo et al. 2007) emphasizing that solvent plays a crucial role in extraction of phenolic compound due to their diverse and complex nature. Anti-oxidant activity of H. spicatum was found comparable using similar in vitro anti-oxidant assays reported earlier (Rawat et al. 2011), whereas, in case of R. procera it was comparatively lower with all the three assays (Rawat et al. 2014). Likewise, it was lower as compared to previous report on V. jatamansi using the ABTS assays (Bhatt et al. 2012; Jugran et al. 2013). Anti-oxidant activity (by DPPH assay) showed positive relationship with phenolic compounds and similar relationship between anti-oxidant activity and phenolic compounds have been reported in many plants from Himalayan origin (Rawat et al. 2011; Bhoyar et al. 2011; Bhatt et al. 2012; Badhani et al. 2015) or other than Himalayan origin (Wojdylo et al. 2007).

Phenolic and flavonoid compounds present in different solvent extract are capable of scavenging ABTS and DPPH radicals, and are able to reduce the ferric ions. Different solvent exhibited species specific response for the extraction of anti-oxidant activity and phenolic content. This may be due to that anti-oxidant activity is exhibited by an array of molecules having diverse polarities and solubility. Also, level of different phenolic compounds exhibited a great variation in occurrence of individual phenolic compounds in all the species, which leads to necessity of optimization of solvent for extraction. A strong positive correlation has been reported between phenolic content and DPPH and ABTS free radical scavenging activity and ferric ion reducing activity (FRAP) in various medicinal plants like H. spicatum (Rawat et al. 2011), Capparis spinosa (Bhoyar et al. 2011) and Lafoensia pacari (Sampaio et al. 2011). Generally, in phenolic compounds, the higher number of hydroxyl groups and those having hydroxyl groups in ortho-position in the aromatic ring usually quench more free radicals on molar basis. Among the quantified phenolic compounds, gallic acid (3,4,5-tri-hydroxy benzoic acid) with three hydroxyl group bonded to aromatic ring in the ortho-position possess more scavenging properties toward free radicals. Caffeic acid and catechin possess a similar ortho-dihydroxy moiety bonded to the aromatic ring in ortho (o–) position and also possess more affinity toward free radical. Ortho substitution (o–) of hydroxyl group (–OH) to the aromatic ring seems adequate for anti-oxidant and scavenging activity of phenolic acid. The lowest anti radical and anti-oxidant activity of some compounds having one hydroxyl group such as 3-hydroxy benzoic acid, 2-hydroxy benzoic acid (salicylic acid), p-coumeric acid (4-hydroxy cinnamic acid) exhibited the lowest anti-radical and anti-oxidant activity is due to the fact that anti-oxidant and anti-radical activity of phenolic acid has positively correlated with a number of hydroxyl groups to the aromatic ring (Sroka and Cisowski 2003).

Presence of anti-oxidant phenolic compounds ensures the role of these species against free radical generated diseases. Individually, gallic acid is polyhydroxyphenolic acid in nature and has been reported as free radical scavenger and induces apoptosis in leukemia, lung cancer, and colon adenocarcinoma cell lines, as well as in normal lymphocyte cells along with strong anti-mutagenic, anti-fungal, anti-bacterial and anti-viral activity (Sohi et al. 2003). Catechins are one of the powerful anti-oxidant from plant sources and known to reduce the risk of ischemic heart diseases by reducing oxidation of low density lipoproteins (Arts et al. 2001). Caffeic acid exhibited variety of potential pharmacological effects against in vitro and in vivo model systems. Recently, inhibitory effect of caffeic acid on cancer cell proliferation by oxidative mechanism in human HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cell line has been evaluated. It also shows immune-modulatory and anti-inflammatory activity and reducing aflatoxin production (Prasad et al. 2011). Chlorogenic acid exhibited anti-hypertensive effects and protective effect in neuro-inflammatory conditions on dopaminergic neurons (Shen et al. 2012). p-Coumaric acid has anti-oxidant properties and is believed to reduce the risk of stomach cancer by reducing the formation of carcinogenic nitrosamines (Kikugawa et al. 1983).

Besides anti-oxidant activity, phenolic compounds of these species may play a role in prevention of food spoilage thus can be utilized as food preservative agent. It has been reported that the rapid growth in antibiotic resistance and the increasing interest in natural products have found medicinal plants as a reliable source for the discovery of active anti-microbial agent and possibly even novel classes of antibiotics (Panghal et al. 2011). This becomes true when number of micro-organisms acquire several resistance mechanism; making them multi-drug resistance (MDR) and develop novel anti-microbial agent for combating resistant organism (Kenneth 2009). In this study, different bacterial and fungal strains exhibited variable sensitivity to various plant extracts at different concentrations while none of the extract was found effective against a fungus, M. gypsaum. A greater sensitivity of bacterial strains than fungal strain might be due to cellular complexity of organization of fungal strains over bacterial strains. All the plant extracts were found active against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This is contrary with the earlier reports, which suggest that plant extracts remain more active against Gram-positive bacteria as compared to Gram-negative bacteria (Perez et al. 1990; Vlietinck et al. 1995). While comparing with standard drugs e.g., Ampicillin, Vancomycin, Ciprofloxacin and Streptomycin, the plant extract demonstrated relatively lesser anti-microbial activity; however, the higher doses of the plant can be comparable. These results show potential utility of natural compounds over synthetic antibiotics considering the reported side effects of synthetic chemicals (Karaman et al. 2003). Also, the synthetic drugs have high production cost, therefore, biologically active compounds derived from plants can be an alternative source to combat infectious diseases (Essawi and Srour 2000). It was interesting to note that R. procera possess higher total phenolic content and anti-microbial activity. Generally, phenolic compounds serve as defensive mechanism against protection by micro-organisms, insects and herbivores in plants. The mechanism thought to be responsible for phenolic toxicity to micro-organism include enzyme inhibition by the oxidized compounds possible through reaction with sulfhydryl group or more non-specific interaction with proteins/enzymes inactivation (quinine, flavonoids and tannins); substrate deprivation (catechins), membrane disruption (epicatechin), binds to adhesins molecules preventing adhesion to host cell (epicatechin gallate, gallocatechin gallate, polyphenol) and complexed with bacterial cell walls, and making it permeable for other solutes etc. The site(s) and number of hydroxyl group are thought to be related to their relative toxicity to microorganism, with evidence that increased hydroxylation results in increased toxicity (Cowan 1999). Considering the anti-fungal and anti-microbial activity, all the species, can be considered as a natural preservative against food-borne pathogens for the food industry.

Hexane extract of H. spicatum, and A. calamus did not show sensitivity against E. coli in any concentration, while, methanolic extract of V. jatamansi was found much effective against bacterial strains. These results are an indicator that polar organic solvents exhibited greater anti-microbial activity and strengthening the fact that anti-microbial agents are polar in nature, therefore, can be extracted through polar organic solvents (Singh and Singh 2000; Natarajan et al. 2005). The results indicated the different sensitivity between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria might be due to the morphological differences in the micro-organisms. Gram-negative bacteria having outer phospholipid membrane made up of lipo-polysaccharide components, thus making the cell membrane impermeable for lipophilic solutes (Nostro et al. 2000). Also, it is possible that lipophilic solutes extracted by hexane extract (non-polar solvent) are, therefore, not much effective against Gram-negative bacterium E. coli. Generally, Gram-positive were found comparatively more susceptible than Gram-negative bacteria, which might be due to the presence of outer peptidoglycan layer, which is not an effective permeability barrier (Nostro et al. 2000). However, in this study, more sensitivity of Gram-negative bacterial strains might be due to other possible mechanism of extracted constituents which are directly associated with membrane disruption, etc. (Cowan 1999).

This study provides first report on anti-microbial activity of H. intermedia and R. procera. The results of present investigation are largely in agreement with the earlier studies on anti-oxidant and anti-microbial activity of other species (Aqil and Ahmad 2003; Bisht et al. 2006; Asha-Devi and Ganjewala 2009; Sati et al. 2011; Rawat et al. 2011) and provide a lead towards searching new source of anti-oxidants and anti-microbial substances. As such, the medicinal plants have received much attention in the food and flavoring industries as a source of natural anti-oxidant and anti-microbial agents. In this context, the results of this study could prove valuable for promoting the use of such species as potential supplement of neutraceuticals. Also, the results obtained in this study prove the efficacy of traditional uses of the plants as herbal medicine and food preservatives. However, considering preliminary nature of these results, deeper investigation towards potential discovery of new natural bioactive compounds is essentially required. Also, investigation to establish synergy between anti-oxidant activity and anti-microbial activity is needed.
