
Abstract

In vitro-in vivo correlations (IVIVCs) play an important role in formulation development and drug approval. At the heart of IVIVC is deconvolution, the method of deriving an in vivo “dissolution profile” for comparison with in vitro dissolution data. IVIVCs are generally believed to be possible for highly permeable and highly soluble compounds with release/dissolution as the rate-limiting step. In this manuscript, we apply the traditional deconvolution methods, Wagner-Nelson and numerical deconvolution, to profiles simulated using a simplified small intestine absorption and transit model. Small intestinal transit, dissolution, and absorption rate constants are varied across a range of values approximately covering those observed in the literature. IVIVC plots and their corresponding correlation coefficients are analyzed for each combination of parameters to determine the applicability of the deconvolution methods under a range of rate-limiting conditions. For highly absorbed formulations, the correlation coefficients obtained during IVIVC are comparable for both methods and steadily decline with decreasing dissolution rate and increasing transit rate. The applicability of numerical deconvolution to IVIVC is not greatly affected by absorption rate, whereas the applicability of Wagner-Nelson falls when dissolution rate overcomes absorption rate and absorption becomes the rate-limiting step. The discrepancy between the expected and deconvolved input arises from the violation of a key assumption of deconvolution that the unknown input and unit impulse enter the system in the same location.



INTRODUCTION

In vitro-in vivo correlations (IVIVC) play an important role in the production and approval of drug products and formulations. Once an IVIVC is established for a set of formulations, then in vitro dissolution tests can be used in place of further bioequivalence studies in the production or modification of different formulations. Thus, IVIVCs play an important role in the industry, saving time, money, and unnecessary clinical trials. At the heart of IVIVC is deconvolution, the method of deriving an in vivo “dissolution profile” for point by point comparison with in vitro dissolution data in what is termed a “level A” IVIVC by the FDA.

Several methods of deconvolution have been used over the past 50 years in the field of pharmacokinetics. The traditional methods, Wagner-Nelson and Loo-Reigelman, appeared in the 1960s. These methods have been used extensively to determine the absorption kinetics following an oral administration, and Wagner-Nelson is still the most frequently used method in IVIVC. Numerical deconvolution emerged in the 1970s as an alternative method of calculating drug input rates (whether it be the rate of absorption or rate of dissolution).

These deconvolution methods have been applied to the calculation of IVIVCs for a variety of compounds and formulations in the literature, but often, the assumptions underlying their applicability are not discussed in detail. It has been noted in the literature that IVIVCs are generally possible for high permeability compounds and for formulations where release/dissolution is the rate-limiting step, with dissolution still occurring within the time frame of intestinal transit, provided that there is a dissolution method that can effectively differentiate between different release characteristics. This manuscript will further challenge this general rule and intentionally push the boundaries to reveal where deconvolution can be safely used in IVIVC, and where it can be expected to fail.

We focus on the traditional deconvolution methods, Wagner-Nelson and numerical deconvolution, and their applicability under different rate-limiting conditions. We chose the former since it is the most widely used deconvolution method in IVIVC and the latter since it can be used to predict in vivo dissolution separately from absorption. The sensitivity of IVIVC with these methods to different rate-limiting conditions was tested on a simplified compartmental transit model. This was achieved by generating a number of simulations, each with a different combination of absorption, dissolution, and transit rates, applying the deconvolution methods to the resulting profiles and establishing an IVIVC for each case.



DISCUSSION

Supposing it was possible to perform the perfect in vitro experiment that would exactly match the in vivo dissolution kinetics, we might assume the widely accepted deconvolution methods would be able to obtain a reasonable IVIVC. Plotting the first order dissolution curve using the simulated in vivo first order rate constant gives us this theoretically perfect in vitro dissolution profile. Plotting this simulated in vitro dissolution profile against the dissolution/absorption profile deconvolved from the simulated in vivo profiles, one can determine whether an IVIVC can be established.

The sensitivity analysis we performed offers a perspective on the rate-limiting steps involved during IVIVC. For the Wagner-Nelson method, rate-limiting transit reveals the importance of the relationship between absorption and dissolution. As ka decreases, higher kD gives poorer IVIVC which is in agreement with the idea that IVIVC is likely to be possible for high permeability, dissolution rate-limited formulations. However, this interaction is not observed for numerical deconvolution using an oral solution as the UIR. Numerical deconvolution gives very consistent results across the range of absorption rates, regardless of whether or not dissolution is the rate limiting step. Dissolution rate does however play a role in the applicability of numerical deconvolution to IVIVC when dissolution occurs outside of the intestinal transit window. In this case, IVIVC is more likely possible when intestinal transit is the rate-limiting step.

Though the simulated in vitro dissolution profile and the simulated in vivo dissolution incorporated into the model follow the exact same kinetics, the application of deconvolution does not obtain a reasonable IVIVC in every situation. The reason for this discrepancy is in the underlying assumptions required to apply deconvolution. Recall that there are two major assumptions in the derivation of numerical deconvolution. The first is that the system is linear, i.e., dose independent. This first assumption is not violated as all of the expressions in the test problem are linear in the state variables. The second is that the unknown input and the UIR enter the system in the same location. This is where the violation occurs.

It is clear that Wagner-Nelson is estimating the input in a location different to that where dissolution occurs since it is providing an estimate of the amount entering the systemic circulation, following both dissolution and permeation. It may not be obvious that this assumption is also violated for numerical deconvolution using the oral solution as the UIR. The transit of solid drug before dissolution is where the violation occurs.

In fact, when intestinal transit was removed from the system, and the intestinal compartments were replaced with one compartment each for the solid and dissolved drug, the deconvolved input then had the expected form of kD ⋅ Asol,1(t). Including intestinal transit of the solid compartment introduces a complexity into the model so that the deconvolved input no longer has the “reasonably expected” form.

The underperformance of Wagner-Nelson for low permeability compounds should be expected based on the fact that it is measuring the in vivo fraction absorbed, not the fraction dissolved. The relative stability of numerical deconvolution in response to a wide range of absorption rates should also be expected since using an IR solution as the UIR measures the in vivo fraction dissolved. Despite this fact, Wagner-Nelson is still the method of choice in the literature. In a literature search of journal articles in 2013 in which dissolution IVIVIC was performed, Wagner-Nelson was the most frequently applied method. Of the 27 articles identified in the search, 15 applied Wagner-Nelson (e.g., 13–15), while only 4 applied numerical deconvolution (e.g., 16). The remaining either applied a different method to obtain a level A IVIVC (e.g., a mechanistic model) or did not attempt a level A IVIVC at all. Considering the class of compounds that were investigated, it is perhaps not surprising that Wagner-Nelson was generally found to be sufficient. BCS class could be identified for 13 of the 27 publications examined, and all but one of these fell into BCS class 1 or 2, indicating that they were high permeability compounds. The remaining compound was of BCS class 3, and in that investigation, a level A IVIVC was not attempted. The absence of level A IVIVCs in the literature for these classes of compounds might reflect on the ability (or inability) to establish such IVIVCs, as unsuccessful IVIVCs tend not to be published. Since Wagner-Nelson, as the predominant method applied in the literature, performs poorly under absorption limited conditions, it would be interesting to see if a more widespread adoption of numerical deconvolution resulted in more successful IVIVCs for class 3 and 4.

While numerical deconvolution seemed to perform consistently well across the different scenarios, this performance can be dependent upon the accuracy of the numerical method applied. In the previous section, we noted that for a smaller test problem, our numerically deconvolved input exactly matched the analytically derived input (Fig. 6b). This may not be representative of the practical application of numerical deconvolution, which can be highly sensitive to noisy data, and results can vary depending on the prescribed form for the unknown input function. So in practice, numerical deconvolution may also have its limitations.

The simplicity of our test model and the range of parameter values selected may also indicate some limitations to our analysis, as some of the simulated scenarios may not have practical significance. For example, IVIVC is mainly applied to modified release formulations which often target the colon as the site of absorption, while the test model only included the small intestine. Several of the simulated combinations may result in a slower dissolution rate than could be realistically simulated with this test model. For the simulations involving the middle kT value, the residence time was 3.33 h, and a formulation that would ensure 80% dissolution in this time frame would need a kD greater than approximately 0.483 h−1. For the longest simulated residence time of 13.3 h, kD would need to be greater than 0.121 h−1, and for the shortest time of 0.833 h, kD would need to be greater than 1.93 h−1. In this range, numerical deconvolution performs very well, producing correlation coefficients consistently above 0.9.

However, the simplicity of our test model may also underestimate the disparity between in vitro dissolution tests and the simulated in vivo environment since the simulations have not taken into account that dissolution may vary with pH, which varies along the intestinal tract, and that absorption may vary with surface area of the different intestinal segments. Additionally, intestinal absorption may create sink conditions in vivo which can increase the in vivo release/dissolution rate.

Experimentalists have acknowledged the discrepancy between in vitro dissolution testing and the in vivo intestinal environment. For example, some have introduced a permeability compartment into their in vitro dissolution methods, acknowledging the effect of absorption on dissolution testing. Other examples include a modified USP 2 apparatus with a built-in pH gradient to account for pH-dependent solubility of poorly soluble basic drugs, or a multi-compartment stomach-duodenum model to simulate the dynamic conditions brought on by transport from the stomach to the duodenum as well as pH-dependent solubility. Taking things even further are in vitro digestion models with compartments for each of the stomach, duodenum, jejunum, and ileum, with lipases and acids incorporated in the stomach and pancreatic juices and bile in a duodenal compartment, among other simulated physiological attributes. However, these in vitro methods may be difficult to translate to the in vivo situation, with the scaling of in vitro compartment volumes up to physiological volumes, the transits between the in vitro compartments to physiological transit times, and the effect of absorption on dissolution kinetics.

Instead of creating an all encompassing in vitro system, physiologically based in silico models (e.g., GastroPlus™, PK-Sim®, and SimCYP®) have gone a different route by taking separate dissolution and absorption measurements in vitro and physiological parameters obtained in vivo and combining them into one dynamic model within the in silico environment. For example, a solubility model can be fit to data obtained at a range of pH, Caco-2 permeability can be scaled to in vivo permeability, and these properties and more can be incorporated into an in silico model which accounts for the varied intestinal environment with the transition through different pH values, surface area to volume ratios, all with the appropriate transit times. These models have been used recently in the establishment of IVIVCs, among other applications. For example, GastroPlus™ proved useful in the case of a manufacturing site change for a low solubility compound that dissolved rapidly in the stomach, with two formulations showing similarity in dissolution at pH 2, however failing to show similarity at higher pH. In another application of physiologically based IVIVC, SimCYP® was useful in separately accounting for intestinal and hepatic first pass metabolism during IVIVC, which clouded the in vivo dissolution profile obtained with traditional deconvolution methods. However, these in silico models also have their challenges with the multitude of in vitro and in vivo data required to build and validate them (GastroPlus™: Simulations Plus, Inc, Lancaster, CA http://www.simulations-plus.com, PK-Sim®: Bayer Technology Services, Leverkusen, Germany, http://www.systems-biology.com/products/pk-sim.html, SimCYP®: Simcyp Ltd, Sheffield, UK, http://www.simcyp.com).

With experimentalists pushing the boundary of in vitro dissolution and absorption systems, and modellers broadening the scope of in silico models, it is clear that deconvolution in IVIVC does not exist in isolation. The limitations and boundaries of applicability for deconvolution that have been discussed here may well be overcome with the right choice of in vitro experiment or in silico model.
