
Abstract

Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) using nest extract of paper wasp (Polistes sp) was investigated in this work. The AgNPs were characterized by UV–Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and evaluated for antibacterial, antifungal, dye degradation, blood anticoagulation, and blood clot dissolution (thrombolytic) activities. The crystalline polydispersed AgNPs with size range of 12.5–95.55 nm absorbed maximally at 428 nm and showed anisotropic structures of sphere, triangle, hexagon, rod, and rhombus. The FTIR data showed prominent peaks at 3426 and 1641 cm−1, which indicate the involvement of phenolics compounds and proteins in the synthesis of AgNPs. The prominence of Ag in the EDX spectra showed that indeed, AgNPs were formed. The AgNPs showed potent antibacterial activities (12–35 mm) against three multi-drug strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella granulomatis. While the growth of Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus niger was completely suppressed, the AgNPs produced growth inhibition of 75.61 % against Aspergillus fumigatus at 100 µg/ml. Furthermore, the AgNPs degraded malachite green to the tune of 93.1 %. The AgNPs also prevented coagulation of blood, while it completely dissolved preformed blood clots within 5 min showing the potent anticoagulation and thrombolytic activities. This study, which is the first of its kind to use nest extract of paper wasp for the synthesis of nanoparticles, has shown that the biosynthesized AgNPs could be deployed for biomedical and catalytic applications.



Introduction

The art of synthesis and the applications of nanoparticles have continued to expand due to the abundance of biological materials that are rich in bioreductant molecules for the eco-friendly synthesis of nanoparticles. The avoidance of use of hazardous procedures has also widen the scope of biomedical applications, with appreciable level of biocompatibility and lesser toxicity compared with those synthesized using chemical route. To this extent, several biomaterials from plants, bacteria, fungi, algae, and among others have been used to produce nanoparticles (Kumar et al. 2012; Roopan et al. 2013; Velayutham et al. 2013; Das et al. 2014; Kumar et al. 2014; Metuku et al. 2014; Lateef et al. 2015a, b, c, 2016a, b; Lateef and Adeeyo 2015; Waghmare et al. 2015; Yugandhar et al. 2015). To expand the frontiers of applications of biomolecules for the green synthesis of nanoparticles, some recent studies have focused on the use of metabolites from arthropods (Xu et al. 2013; Aramwit et al. 2014; Lateef et al. 2015d). Among several metallic nanoparticles, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have been the most studied due to the versatility of its applications for diverse biological, biomedical, catalytic, electrical, and electrochemical purposes. These have made AgNPs to be of high relevance in environmental, catalytic, healthcare, food, agriculture, biomedical, and textile applications (Keat et al. 2015).

Paper wasps of the genus Polistes have been the most studied among the eusocial wasps (Hymenoptera, Vespidae, Polistinae), of which about 200 species of cosmopolitan occurrence had been described (West-Eberhard 2006; Sinzato et al. 2011; Nguyen and Kojima 2014). Polistes make colonies usually consisting of about 100 individuals that live in non-enveloped nests, which are made on twigs, leaves, dense shrubs and grass, hollow trees and elevated natural cavities, and manmade structures (Wenzel 1996; Clapperton and Lo 2000). The nests, which are paper-like in form, are derived from the foraging activities of wasps on plant materials (Evans and West-Eberhard 1970), and served as compartments to oviposit eggs by young females. In addition to richness in cellulose, the nests of Polistes have reportedly being rich in proteins with more than 20 amino acids detected from field and laboratory nests, of which glycine, serine, alanine, valine, and proline were the most prevalent amino acids (Singer et al. 1992; Kudô et al. 2000a, b). Though arthropods are abundantly rich in the synthesis of novel biomaterials, such as silk, cobwebs, and nests, the use of metabolites from arthropods for the green synthesis of nanoparticles seems to be at infancy with a few literature reports (Xu et al. 2013; Aramwit et al. 2014; Lateef et al. 2015d). Therefore, there is need to explore arthropods for their nanobiotechnological applications.

In our previous study, we have shown that a similar biomaterial, spider cobweb could be used for biosynthesis of AgNPs with potent antimicrobial activities (Lateef et al. 2015d). Therefore, this work was conceptualized to evaluate the potential of nest of paper wasp for the green and eco-friendly synthesis of AgNPs, thereby finding a biotechnological utilization of the biomaterial. The study further examined the antibacterial, antifungal, malachite degradation, blood anticoagulation, and thrombolytic (lysis of blood clots) activities of the biosynthesized AgNPs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of the use of paper wasp’s nest for the biosynthesis of AgNPs.


