
Abstract

This study reports an industrially applicable non-sterile xylitol fermentation process to produce xylitol from a low-cost feedstock like corn cob hydrolysate as pentose source without any detoxification. Different immobilization matrices/mediums (alginate, polyvinyl alcohol, agarose gel, polyacrylamide, gelatin, and κ-carrageenan) were studied to immobilize Candida tropicalis NCIM 3123 cells for xylitol production. Amongst this calcium alginate, immobilized cells produced maximum amount of xylitol with titer of 11.1 g/L and yield of 0.34 g/g. Hence, the process for immobilization using calcium alginate beads was optimized using a statistical method with sodium alginate (20, 30 and 40 g/L), calcium chloride (10, 20 and 30 g/L) and number of freezing–thawing cycles (2, 3 and 4) as the parameters. Using optimized conditions (calcium chloride 10 g/L, sodium alginate 20 g/L and 4 number of freezing–thawing cycles) for immobilization, xylitol production increased significantly to 41.0 g/L (4 times the initial production) with corn cob hydrolysate as sole carbon source and urea as minimal nutrient source. Reuse of immobilized biomass showed sustained xylitol production even after five cycles.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0388-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The increasing demand and exorbitant cost of low calorie polyol like xylitol open up challenge for making low-cost xylitol from renewable feedstock. Xylitol, a naturally occurring sugar alcohol sweetener, that has sweetness similar to sucrose but 40 % lower energy, negative heat of dissolution, low viscosity in solution, absence of the Maillard reaction, higher chemical stability, and several biomedical properties (Bär et al. 1991). Emil Fisher was the first to synthesize xylitol by reacting xylose with sodium amalgam in 1891 (Bär et al. 1991). Xylitol is beneficial for nutrition (Sreenivas-Rao et al. 2006), for prevention of dental caries (Emidi 1978) and low-calorie food preparation for diabetic patients (Pepper and Olinger 1988) but these applications are limited due to high cost of xylitol produced by chemical means. The selling cost for xylitol is 6–7 $/kg for bulk purchase (Rafiqul and Sakinath 2013). Xylitol is currently manufactured by chemical hydrogenation of pure d-xylose in the presence of nickel catalyst at elevated temperature and pressure, yielding a product with a high purity (>99.5 %) and a yield of 50–60 % with respect to the initial xylose (Dieters 1975; Ojamo et al. 2009). Alternatively, xylitol can be produced by biological process which shows certain advantages like milder conditions of pressure, temperature, pH, agitation, cell inhibitors and lower costs of downstream processing due to the production of lower amounts of by-products (Saha 2003). However, carbon source and operating cost must be economically competitive to ensure the feasibility of the process. Corn cob, a major waste obtained in corn production and is a promising and attractive alternative for xylose rich hemicellulosic hydrolysate stream (Rivas et al. 2003).

While comparing with the free cell system, the immobilized microorganism system can be used to improve the fermentation performance and to reduce the overall production costs (Roberto et al. 1991). Immobilized cell bioprocesses becomes obvious and most preferred solution because they allow higher fermentation rates, permit high cell concentration, reuse of cells for extended time, reduce costs related to inoculum development, protect the entrapped biocatalyst from inhibitors, prevent washout and provide ease of separation of biocatalyst from fermentation broth (Jirku et al. 2000). Cell immobilization via gel entrapment is widely used in bench-scale tests, and many gel-like materials are used as carriers, which may be based on natural (alginate, κ-carrageenan, agarose, agar, chitosan, etc.) or synthetic (polyacrylamide, polyacrylate, polyurethane, etc.) polymers or precursors (Lozinsky et al. 1997). Among these supports screened for yeast cell immobilization to perform xylose-to-xylitol bioconversion, calcium alginate support has received more attention in biomedical and food industries due to properties viz. integrity, minimal mass transfer limitation, cheap, non-toxic, mild conditions and utilizes ingredients that are accepted as food additive (Champagne et al. 2000). The productivity of immobilized system is affected by three parameters, i.e. calcium chloride, sodium alginate and number of freezing–thawing cycles (Cunha et al. 2009). However, limited number of studies report optimized conditions for immobilization of Candida and even so, most of these studies use detoxified hydrolysate for fermentation (Wang et al. 2009; Carvalho et al. 2003, 2004; Cheng et al. 2009; El-Batal and Khalaf 2004; Liaw et al. 2008; Deng et al. 2006; Sarrouh et al. 2007; Gyan et al. 2011). Inclusion of the detoxification step results in an increase in the overall production cost. It is therefore, desirable to use non-detoxified hydrolysate. Hence, the present work was undertaken with an objective to enhance xylitol production from non-detoxified corn cob hydrolysate using statistically optimized immobilized process for entrapping the cells.


