
Abstract

Efficiency of white-rot fungi—Stereum ostrea (S. ostrea) as a test culture and Phanerochaete chrysosporium (P. chrysosporium) as a reference culture in colour removal from a textile dye, Remazol brilliant blue-19 (RBB-19) in medium was compared in this study. S. ostrea was more efficient than P. chrysosporium in decoloration process. Different parameters pH, temperature, sources of carbon and nitrogen, stationary and shaking conditions were optimized for bleaching of dye by the fungal cultures. Optimal growth conditions for decoloration of dye by both cultures were pH 5.0, temperature 35 °C, glucose and fructose as best carbon source at 1 % level, peptone and urea as best nitrogen source and shaking conditions (150 rpm). Culture broth free of colour (99 % of decoloration) was achieved with S. ostrea as against 70 % decoloration by P. chrysosporium on 6th day of incubation. Adsorption of dye to fungal biomass as reflected by colour coating on biomass and participation of lignolytic enzymes in colour removal appeared to be mechanisms involved in decoloration process. The ability of both fungal cultures in removal of colour in effluents with dyes collected from silk saree-weaving cottage unit was tested. S. ostrea was also found to be more effective in colour removal from effluent. S. ostrea appears to be a promising culture for application of bioremediation in decoloration of dyes.



Introduction

Synthetic dyes are a group of organic aromatic molecular structural compounds that are extensively used in textile, paper, printing and dye houses (Lilly and Barnett 1951; Jacob and Azariah 2000; Aksu 2005) . According to their dissociation in an aqueous solution, dyes can be classified as acid, direct reactive dyes (anionic), basic dyes (cationic) and disperse dyes (nonionic) (Mishra and Tripathi 1983). Many chemical dyes are being used increasingly in textile and dyeing industries because of their ease and cost effectiveness in synthesis, firmness and variety in colour compared to that of natural dyes (Mathur et al. 2005). India’s dye industry produces every type of dyes and pigments. Production of dyestuff and pigments in India is close to 80,000 tonnes per annum (Mathur et al. 2005). India is the second largest exporter of dyestuffs and intermediates after China (Mathur et al. 2005).

The textile industry accounts for the largest consumption of dyestuffs, at nearly 80 % (Mathur et al. 2005). According to the survey of the Ecological and Toxicological Association of the Dyestuffs Manufacturing Industry (ETAD), over 90 % of some 4000 dyes have LD50 values greater than 2000 mg/kg (Robinson et al. 2001) which is very dangerous to nature. Effluents from the textile industries containing dyes are highly coloured and are, therefore, visually identifiable (Kilic et al. 2007). The coloured effluents damage the aesthetic quality of water and soil and reduce light penetration and photosynthesis and also some of the dyes are toxic or mutagenic, carcinogenic and allergenic (Kumar et al. 2006). Because of the widespread use and potential carcinogenicity of certain dyes, there has been a growing interest in assessing the hazards associated with dyes available in local markets and hence decoloration of the dye-bearing effluents is of great importance. Everything touched by king Midas turned to gold. By a sort of inversion process, everything that modern men touch turns to a waste product sooner or later. Wastes are usually discarded into water, with or without processing. At present, water is becoming a rare commodity, and the available water resources are inadequate to meet the essential needs of man. Improper disposal methods and inadequate control of toxic effluents from different industries have led to the widespread contamination of surface as well as groundwater and have made the water resources unfit for usage (Odum et al. 1969).

The traditional physical or chemical decoloration methods including coagulation, flocculation, ion exchange, irradiation, precipitation, ozonation and adsorption or a combination of these methods have been used for dye removal from wastewaters (Akar et al. 2009). However, application of these methods is somewhat restricted due to some limitations such as operational costs, formation of hazardous by-products, intensive energy requirement (Padmesh et al. 2005) and limited adaptability to a wide range of effluents (Fu and Viraraghavan 2001). Dye removal from waste water by established waste water treatment processes are expensive and need careful application (Vandevivere et al. 1998). Furthermore, following anaerobic digestion, nitrogen-containing dyes are transformed into aromatic amines that are more toxic and mutagenic than the parent molecules (Ganesh et al. 1999). To overcome these difficulties, microorganisms are being investigated for their potential to bleach dye-bearing effluents. Biotechnological approaches were proven to be potentially effective in treatment of this pollution source in an eco-efficient manner (Robinson et al. 2001). Although many microorganisms belonging to different taxonomic groups of bacteria (Wu et al. 2005) and algae (Dilek et al. 1999) have been reported for their ability to bleach different dyes, fungi, in particular, white-rot group are recognized for their superior capacity to produce extracellular lignolytic enzymes such as laccase (Lac), lignin peroxidase (LiP) and manganese peroxidase (MnP) (Gao et al. 2010; Praveen et al. 2011) which are highly oxidative and nonspecific in action and responsible for degradation and decoloration of a wide range of dyes (Aksu 2005; Praveen et al. 2011). The capacity of organisms in bio-bleaching process of dye differs from one organism to another and is dependent on inherent capacity of the organism, growth conditions and structure of dye. This is quite evident from a comparative study (Baldrian and Snajdr 2006) that five litter-decomposing fungi (LDF) and two reference white-rot cultures exhibited difference in rates of bio-bleaching of 4 dyes including RBB-19 in high nitrogen and high carbon (HNHC) medium. According to this study, the reference culture Trametes versicolor  and LDF Collybia dryophilia displayed the fastest degradation of the dye Poly B-411 whereas other cultures LDF X1 and X2 caused most rapid decoloration of RBB-19. Similarly, Stropharia rugosoannulata was found to decolorise efficiently anthraquinone dye Basic Blue 22 (Jarosz-Wilkolazka et al. 2002). In this study, we report the ability of S. ostrea to bleach the dye—RBB-19 in medium and effluents from silk saree-weaving cottage unit in comparison to the reference culture P. chrysosporium whose potential in color removal of dyes was assessed earlier (Rojek et al. 2004).


