
Abstract

Lignin is a major component of all plants, the degradation of which remains a major challenge to date owing to its recalcitrant nature. Several classes of fungi have been studied to carry out this process to some extent, but overall the process remains inefficient. We have isolated a novel alkalophilic dimorphic lignin-degrading Deuteromycete from soil, identified as “uncultured” and coded as MVI.2011. Supernatant from 12-h culture of MVI.2011 in optimized mineral medium containing lignin pH 9.0 was analysed for Lignin Peroxidase, Manganese Peroxidase and Laccase. Enzyme purification was carried out by standard protocols using ammonium sulphate precipitation followed by further purification by Gel Permeation Chromatography. Analysis of total protein, specific enzyme activity and molecular weight of the GPC-purified LiP, MnP and Laccase showed 93.83 μg/ml, 5.27 U/mg, 42 kDa; 78.13 μg/ml, 13.18 U/mg, 45 kDa and 85.81 μg/ml, 4.77 U/mg, 62 kDa, respectively. The purified enzymes possessed high activity over a wide range of pH (4–11), and temperature (30–55 °C). The optimum substrate concentration was 20 μg/ml of lignin for all the three enzymes. CD spectra suggested that the predominant secondary structure was helix in LiP, and, turns in MnP and Laccase. The breakdown products of lignin degradation by MVI.2011 and the three purified enzymes were detected and identified by FTIR and GC–MS. They were oxalic acid, hentriacontane, derivatives of octadecane, nonane, etc. These vital compounds are certain to find application as biofuels, an alternate energy source in various industries.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0384-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Fungi are well-known microorganisms found to degrade lignin and have been extensively studied (Evans and Hedger 2001; Hatakka 2001). White rot fungi are believed to be the only and most effective degraders of lignin which comprise of several hundred species of Basidiomycetes and a few species of Ascomycetes. They are capable of degrading lignin component of wood completely to CO2 and water. Of late, more diverse and taxonomically distinct fungi have been studied for their lignin-degrading capacity and brought under the purview of useful application in effluent treatment from various pulp and paper industries (Sahadevan et al. 2013). White rot fungi contain specific enzymes Lignin Peroxidase (LiP), Manganese Peroxidase (MnP), Laccase, and hydrogen peroxide-generating enzymes. Along with these enzymes, ROSs (Reactive oxygen species) is also considered to be an important agent for wood decay by fungi. Various combinations of these enzymes are produced by different fungi which suggest different mechanisms of lignin degradation (Sahadevan et al. 2013).

So far ligninolytic enzymes have been known to be produced by various fungi including T. versicolor, Phlebia fascicularia, Dichomitus squalens, Daedalea flavida, Phlebia floridensis and P. Radiate (Arora et al. 2002), but most of them have failed to bring about efficient degradation of lignin at the high pH of pulp paper and such other industrial effluents. Literature survey shows that in general, fungi require a minimum of 2–4 weeks for growth and production of extracellular lignin-degrading enzymes. They also prefer lower pH (4–7) and temperature for lignin decomposition activity (Yang et al. 2011). No single organism has been reported to produce all three enzymes, and, in equal proportions (Li et al. 2001).

MVI.2011, a novel dimorphic alkalophilic fast-growing Deuteromycete was isolated and reported to degrade lignin, melanoidin and dyes (Thankamani et al. 2002; Dev and Thankamani 2012, 2013). The strain isolated and identified resembles Mycelia sterilia in several of its morphological properties and functional characterization; however, further study had to be carried to ascertain its exact species. The unique properties of strain MVI.2011 secreting a variety of enzymes, long shelf life at ambient temperatures, non-sporing nature, rapid growth, and highly alkalophilic nature open up a huge potential for large-scale application of the fungus to treat industrial effluents from pulp paper, distillery, and dye industry. The present study describes the purification and characterization of lignin-degrading enzymes, LiP, MnP and Laccase from MVI.2011 to provide a suitable biological alternative to treat highly alkaline effluent such as pulp and paper industry waste water in particular. We also identified key products obtained by the degradation of lignin by MVI.2011 and three purified enzymes (LiP, MnP and Laccase) which could have potential application as alternate energy source in industries like food processing, biofuels, etc.


