
Abstract

The objective of this study was to characterize the baseline circadian rhythm of testosterone levels in hypogonadal men. A total of 859 baseline profiles of testosterone from hypogonadal men were included in this analysis. The circadian rhythm of the testosterone was described by a stretched cosine function. Model parameters were estimated using NONMEM® 7.3. The effect of different covariates on the testosterone levels was investigated. Model evaluation was performed using non-parametric bootstrap and predictive checks. A stretched cosine function deeply improved the data goodness of fit compared to the standard trigonometric function (p < 0.001; ΔOFV = −204). The effect of the age and the semester, defined as winter and spring versus summer and fall, were significantly associated with the baseline levels of testosterone (p < 0.001, ΔOFV = −15.6, and p < 0.001, ΔOFV = −47.0). Model evaluation procedures such as diagnostic plots, visual predictive check, and non-parametric bootstrap evidenced that the proposed stretched cosine function was able to model the time course of the diurnal testosterone levels in hypogonadal males with accuracy and precision. The circadian rhythm of the testosterone levels was better predicted by the proposed stretched cosine function than a standard cosine function. Testosterone levels decreased by 5.74 ng/dL (2.4%) every 10 years and were 19.3 ng/dL (8.1%) higher during winter and spring compared to summer and fall.



INTRODUCTION

Testosterone affects almost every organ in the body. Functions of testosterone include promoting spermatogenesis, maintenance of accessory organs, muscle growth, development of secondary sexual characteristics, erythropoiesis, bone metabolism, and feedback to the hypothalamus–pituitary. The normal range for early morning total testosterone in healthy adult males ranges from approximately 300 to 1000 ng/dL. Low serum levels of total testosterone or hypogonadism have been associated with a number of morbidities including cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, low muscle mass, low bone mass, low physical performance, and frailty.

Based on bioequivalence guidelines, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends a cutoff value of 250 ng/dL in order to define hypogonadism for clinical trial development and enrollment. In the present analysis, a mean threshold of 300 ng/dL was used to consider a subject as hypogonadal because it was the value used at screening in the available studies, which was in agreement with the common practice. Even though it has been widely discussed, the threshold to consider a subject as hypogonadal is a controversial issue, and different factors have to be considered in the diagnosis of hypogonadism. Since a diurnal pattern where the highest level is reached early in the morning is observed, hypogonadism diagnosis should be performed within the time period of 8:00–10:00 a.m.. Contrary to the substantial evidence for diurnal variation of testosterone, reproducible data demonstrating seasonal patterns of testosterone has been more elusive. While some studies suggest its effects, others have failed to replicate these results. Testosterone concentrations also change as a function of age. In healthy men and starting at the third decade of life, there is, on average, a decrease of 1–2% per year. Moreover, the prevalence of hypogonadism has recently increased. It has been reported that 12%, 19%, 28%, and 49% of men older than 50, 60, 70, or 80 years of age, respectively, suffer from hypogonadism. That is the reason why the use of testosterone replacement therapy (TRT) has increased by more than 43% from 2010 to 2013. Historically, the pathway to approval for a TRT required pharmacokinetic but not clinical efficacy criteria. Present efficacy endpoints included a requirement that more than 75% of the men treated with TRT reach testosterone levels between the range of 300 and 1000 ng/dL.

The circadian pattern of testosterone has been extensively investigated in healthy males. For example, Gupta et al. described the circadian rhythm of testosterone in healthy men; however, they were not able to describe a circadian behavior in hypogonadal men, most likely due to the use of samples after the administration of a transdermal system of testosterone. Moreover, in hypogonadal men, not only are the baseline values lower, but the amplitude of variation is also smaller and thus harder to characterize. Since testosterone is an endogenous substance with a circadian behavior, the assessment of the therapeutic effect of TRT results is challenging. To the best of our knowledge, no model has characterized the time course of the testosterone levels in hypogonadal men under “baseline” or pre-TRT conditions. It should be noted that the term “baseline” is used in the current paper to refer to the absence of TRT. A better understanding of the baseline testosterone kinetics in hypogonadal men would be useful to compare the efficacy between different TRT because the magnitude of the difference in the testosterone levels from the baseline could be considered as the therapeutic TRT effect.

Consequently, the main objective of this analysis was to build a population kinetic model to characterize the circadian rhythm of the baseline testosterone levels in hypogonadal men. This model would be used in the future to compare the efficacy of different TRT. The secondary objectives were to quantify the sources of variability and to explore the impact of patient characteristics on the testosterone kinetic parameters. In this paper, it will be demonstrated that a stretched cosine function is more appropriate to describe the circadian fluctuations in the testosterone levels than a standard cosine function. It will also be shown that the age of the patient and more importantly the time of year have an impact in the baseline levels of testosterone in hypogonadal men.


