
Abstract

The present study was conducted to investigate a new pathway for the degradation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) by Penicillium brevicompactum NRC 829 extracts. Enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of NAD, i.e. alkaline phosphatase, aminohydrolase and glycohydrolase were determined. Alkaline phosphatase was found to catalyse the sequential hydrolysis of two phosphate moieties of NAD molecule to nicotinamide riboside plus adenosine. Adenosine was then deaminated by aminohydrolase to inosine and ammonia. While glycohydrolase catalyzed the hydrolysis of the nicotinamide-ribosidic bond of NAD+ to produce nicotinamide and ADP-ribose in equimolar amounts, enzyme purification through a 3-step purification procedure revealed the existence of two peaks of alkaline phosphatases, and one peak contained deaminase and glycohydrolase activities. NAD deaminase was purified to homogeneity as estimated by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis with an apparent molecular mass of 91 kDa. Characterization and determination of some of NAD aminohydrolase kinetic properties were conducted due to its biological role in the regulation of cellular NAD level. The results also revealed that NAD did not exert its feedback control on nicotinamide amidase produced by P. brevicompactum.



Introduction

Increasing evidences have indicated that NAD and NADH play critical roles not only in energy metabolism, but also in several cellular functions including calcium homeostasis, gene expression, ageing, immunological mechanisms and cell death (Leonarda 2008). Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and its reduced form NADH are essential cofactors for many redox biocatalysts. Because these cofactors are consumed in stoichiometric amounts, whole-cell biocatalysts have been routinely employed to reduce the costs. To further improve the efficacy of redox biocatalysts, it is essential to maintain the stability of nicotinamide cofactors, for which it is necessary to block degradation pathways for NAD (H). While the biosynthesis of NAD (H) has been well studied, it is less understood how NAD (H) are degraded (Wang et al. 2014).

Among studies on NAD degradation by non-pathogenic microorganisms, filamentous fungi are found to be particularly interesting because of their easy cultivation, high production of extracellular enzymes with large industrial potential. Besides, fungal enzymes are more resistant to harsh climatic conditions than other sources. These enzymes are applied in the industrialization of chemical and biomedical products (Guimarães et al. 2006). As newly discovered eukaryotic NAD precursors, NR and NaR have the potential to be important mammalian nutritional supplements and/or drugs (Ma et al. 2007; Bogan and Brenner 2008). Alkaline phosphatases involved in NAD degradation which cleave NAD at the phosphate linkage to produce ADP and nicotinamide riboside have been characterized earlier in our laboratory from A. niger (Elzainy and Ali 2000), A. terreus (Elzainy and Ali 2003, 2005). Subsequently, alkaline phosphatase splits ADP to AMP plus free inorganic phosphate. AMP was further cleaved by the same enzyme to produce adenosine plus Pi. Non-specific degradation of NAD to nicotinamide riboside was detected in Escherichia coli (Wang et al. 2014). The applications of alkaline phosphatase isolated from different sources are reviewed with special reference to the macromolecular structure and action mechanism of the enzyme in the reactions of phosphomonoester hydrolysis. The practicality of alkaline phosphatase as a helpful tool in conducting enzyme-linked immunoassays is demonstrated (Zueva et al. 1993).

N-glycosidic linkage of the released nicotinamide riboside was hydrolytically cleaved by glycohydrolase from the same organism producing nicotinamide (Nm) and free ribose. A glycohydrolase is highly specific for NMN. NAD, NADP, nicotinic acid-adenine dinucleotide, nicotinamide riboside catalyses (Imai 1979). On the other hand, studies on NAD+ biosynthesis originate from the involvement of NAD+ in skin cancer prevention mechanisms that include enhancing DNA repair and preventing photo-immune suppression. In addition, NAD+ serves as a cofactor for energy generation used in cornified epidermal barrier formation and release of agents with protective effects on skin (Leonarda 2008).

Adenosine aminohydrolase (ADA) participates in the purine metabolism, whereas it degrades either adenosine or 2′-deoxyadenosine producing inosine or 2′-deoxyinosine, respectively (Kocic et al. 1991). The physiological function of ADA is critical in controlling the effects of these metabolites on immunological, neurological and vascular systems. ADA is also involved in the development of T. lymphocytes band as it is evident from the fact that ADA deficient animals suffer from B and T lymphopaenia (Ray and Sharma 2002; Ashok et al. 2008). Serum ADA levels increase in pancreatic disorders, especially in pancreatic cancer; therefore it may be used as a serum marker for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer (Bi et al. 2007). The evidence of high ADA activity during rapid and stimulated growth of normal tissues is of importance in making a fully functional purine salvage pathway possible (Seiler 2004). Adenosine deaminase of Aspergillus oryzae (Ali et al. 2012, 2014) has been characterized in our laboratory. Both the adenosine and by-products of the NAD-consuming enzymes such as NMN and Nm can be recycled back to NAD (Sorcil et al. 2010; Gazzaniga et al. 2009). Therefore, the present research focused on studying in detail the degradation of NAD+ by Penicillium brevicompactum NRC 829 extracts. Besides, NAD aminohydrolase was purified to homogeneity and some of kinetic properties were characterized.


