
Abstract

Food insecurity is a major issue in current scenario where a large section of mankind is at risk of insufficient diet. As food productivity has its limits, the prospecting of unutilized or underutilized flora as food candidates is collectively recognized as a sustainable option. In the past decade, a number of obscure plants have been identified to be rich in dietary components and deemed fit for integration into the food platter. This review discusses a candidate Salicornia, belonging to family Amaranthaceae. This halophyte has a broad geographical distribution, and phytochemical profiling has indicated its food relevance. An array of functional nutrients as fibers, polyphenols, and flavonoids have been detected in Salicornia. Though high salt, oxalate and saponin content in the plants are anti-nutrients, they can be removed to justify usage of Salicornia as a ‘sea vegetable’. Apart from culinary relevance, medicinal attributes like immunomodulatory, lipid-lowering, antiproliferative, osteoprotective, and hypoglycemic render this lesser-known marsh plant significant for phytochemical studies. This appraisal is expected to be useful towards further research and popularization of this extremophile halophyte.





Discussion

From historical usage of this halophyte for glass making, the shift towards biofuel harvest occurred (Lieth and Al Masoom 1993). Salicornia though not primarily or widely consumed; its ingestion as food and medication is, however, not altogether new. Trials and nutritional assessments on it for human edibility are novel. As outlined in above sections, Salicornia both have its pros and cons as a food candidate. Additional research might better illuminate on its relevance for consumption. In this regard, some significant areas pertaining to it have been discussed below.

Chenopodiaceae members are known to contain high amount of crude protein, sulfur and minerals (Norman et al. 2013), which goes in favor of Salicornia as an edible plant. Mucilages are plant-derived polysaccharides with myriad roles such as food thickeners, binding agents, water holding agents, emulsifier etc. (Nayak et al. 2010). In this regard, Salicornia as a source of mucilage can be assessed. Amaranthaceae family member plumed cockscomb (Celosia argentea) elaborates an acidic polysaccharide celosian that has been characterized to ameliorate liver injuries (Hase et al. 1997). The healing effect was linked to immunomodulating effect via tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 β) and NO production (Hase et al. 1997). Consequently, Salicornia can also be evaluated for immune-modulating polysaccharides.

Previously, the adverse effects of saponin as a dietary ingredient have been mentioned. However, medicinally, saponins are crucial with an array of their health benefits reported so far, such as cytotoxic activity (Podolak et al. 2010). The variable biological effects of saponins stem from their diverse structural configurations. Based on the hydrophobic aglycone moiety, the glycosides can be categorized as triterpenoids, steroids or glycoalkaloidss (Moses et al. 2014). Amaranthaceae member C. argentea seed contains triterpenoid saponins (celosin) which shows in vitro antitumor and anti-inflammatory properties (Wu et al. 2011).

Apart from the validated nutrients present in the plant, its food candidature can be assumed from its plant family Amaranthaceae. Many conventional and emerging foods are sourced from this family (Amaranthaceae), which builds trust on the food potential of Salicornia. This family is at the forefront of valuable food sources e.g. beet, spinach, amaranthus and quinoa (Délano-Frier et al. 2011). Particularly, quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.), a related halophyte has surged to prominence in recent times, due to its high protein, lipids, fibers, vitamins and mineral contents (Maradini Filho et al. 2015). Only a few species have been evaluated so far, other species are largely inconspicuous, though there are more than 50 species under this genus. Investigation on these species is expected to reveal myriad other biological benefits. So far, among all Saicornia species, only S. herbacea has been the subject of lipid lowering effect, which provides ample scope to visit the potential of other species. In recent times polysaccharides from many higher plants (Strickland 2001), mushrooms (Akramiene et al. 2007) and seaweeds (Jeong et al. 2015) have been validated as candidates as immune-therapeutics. These findings build the prospect of recruiting Salicornia as well, in immune modulation.

With due research input, this genus might be popularized for food and medicinal purposes. Pairing with compatible and complementary botanicals might improve efficacy, though cross reaction-caused adverse reactions must be monitored first.

Study on this genus is not a new area and several interesting findings have accumulated over the years. It is beyond the scope of this manuscript to furnish them all, yet it is justified to outline that this genus has been evaluated to shed light on marsh habitat loss, heavy metal accumulation and saline stress tolerance mechanisms of plants etc., Adaptation to salinity is particularly a well-pursued area, for its relevance to acclimatize vulnerable plants. A study reported of improved salt tolerance in transgenic alfalfa grass by over-expression of the S. europaea Na(+)/H(+) antiporter gene SeNHX1 (Zhang et al. 2014). Another study found that fresh water cultivation of Salicornia yields higher phenolic and flavonoid content over saline water cultivation (Kang et al. 2015). In addition, the fresh water-grown Salicornia demonstrated higher in vitro cytotoxic effects (Kang et al. 2015). However, it is the food and medicinal facet that needs to be intensified.

Alien plant invasions are a threat to this marsh plant, which even though at preliminary stage of nutrition research, is a validated critical component of wetland food chain. Dodder (Cuscuta salina), the Convolvulaceae creeper infestation on Salicornia has been observed. C. salina parasitizes S. virginica, eventually killing the latter (Pennings and Callaway 1996) (Fig. 1b).
