
Abstract

The quantum of marine fish wastes produced by fish processing industries has necessitated to search new methods for its disposal. Hence, this study is focused on production and purification of halophilic organic solvent tolerant protease (HOSP) from marine Alcaligenes faecalis APCMST-MKW6 using marine shell wastes as substrate. The candidate bacterium was isolated from the marine sediment of Manakudi coast and identified as A. faecalis APCMST-MKW6. The purified protease showed 16.39-fold purity, 70.34 U/mg specific activity with 21.67 % yield. The molecular weight of the purified alkaline protease was 49 kDa. This purified protease registered maximum activity at pH 9 and it was stable between pH 8–9 after 1.30 h of incubation. The optimum temperature registered was 60 °C and it was stable between 50 and 60 °C even after 1.30 h of incubation. This enzyme also showed maximum activity at 20 % NaCl concentration. Further, manganese chloride, magnesium chloride, calcium chloride and barium chloride influenced this enzyme activity remarkably and it was also found to be enhanced by many of the tested surfactants and solvents. The candidate bacterium effectively deproteinized the shrimp shell waste compared to the other tested crustaceans shell wastes and also attained maximum antioxidant activity.



Introduction

Halophilic organic solvent tolerant bacteria are one of the most important groups involved in the extremophiles field. Among this, bacterial proteins from the relevant bacteria tolerate well in different concentrations of salts and organic solvents due to their extreme characteristics. As of now halophilic tolerant proteins are received much attention in industrial sectors due to their applied extreme potentials. The specific advantages of the halophilic organic solvent tolerant proteases are; cell enlargement, strengthening of cell membrane, degradation and biotransformation of organic solvents and solvent efflux pump (Rahman et al. 2006). Also proteases that can mediate catalysis in non aqueous solvents tender new possibilities, such as shifting of thermodynamic balance in favor of synthesis, improving the solubility of hydrophobic substrates and products, facilitating the product recovery, and improving the thermal stability of the enzymes (Doukyu and Ogino 2010). Among the microbial proteases, alkaline proteases occupy 60 % of the total world enzyme production, with specific applications in bakery, brewing, detergent, diagnostic reagents, feeds modification, leather finishing, laundry additives, pharmaceuticals, and peptide synthesis, silk, silver recovery from X-ray/photographic film, soy processing, and waste treatment (Rajkumar et al. 2011).

Marine industry generates 50–60 % of the total weight of shellfish as waste consists of protein (35–50 %), chitin (15–25 % of dry weight) and inorganic compound (calcium carbonate) which are considered as major environmental pollutants due to uncontrolled dumping (Islam et al. 2004; Sachindra et al. 2005). Bioconversion of these materials has been proposed as waste treatment alternate to the disposal of shellfish wastes. The utilization of these wastes not only solves the environmental problem but also decreases the production costs of microbial proteases. Halophilic solvent-tolerant bacteria make up a group of microorganisms are becoming more popular in academia and industry, due to their unique ability to live in presence of organic solvents. Some of these bacteria have been found to produce haloalkaline as well as solvent-tolerant enzymes, but only a few reports are available regarding the purification and characterization of the halophilic organic solvent-tolerant protease (Annamalai et al. 2012, 2014a, b; Maruthiah et al. 2014, 2015).

The bioconversion of marine shell wastes by various marine coastal proteolytic bacterial species was reported by several authors (Annamalai et al. 2012, 2014a, b; Maruthiah et al. 2014, 2015). However, the application of Bacillus sp. for the deproteinization of marine crustacean wastes is rarely seen. In this study, the protease-producing Bacillus sp. can be used for deproteinization of crustacean wastes. Generally, the preparation of chitin from various crustacean shells involves demineralization and deproteinization with the use of strong acids or bases. Typically to overcome the scarcity of the chemical treatments, microorganisms and proteolytic enzymes were effectively used to deproteinze the crustacean wastes (Jellouli et al. 2011; Haddar et al. 2011; Ghorbel-Bellaaj et al. 2012; Maruthiah et al. 2015; Hajji et al. 2015). Considering the above facts discussed in this study, an attempt has been made on the production and purification of the HOSP from the coastal sedimentary bacterium using marine shell wastes. Further, the candidate strain also performed maximum deproteinization and antioxidant efficiency using shrimp shell waste.


