


Introduction

Chitosanase are enzymes which specifically hydrolyze chitosan to produce chitooligomers and monomers, i.e. glucosamine and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine, which depends on types of enzyme. On the basis of their mode of action, two types of chitosanase enzymes have been reported: exo-(EC 3.2.1.165) and endochitosanase (EC 3.2.1.132). Endo-acting enzymes hydrolyse β-1,4 linkages between Gln (glucosamine) residues in partly acetylated chitosan. It is used for production of chitooligosaccharides (COS) by acting on reducing end of chitosan; however, exo-enzymes attacks chitosan from non-reducing end of COS or chitosan to produce Gln (glucosamine) or N-acetyl-d-glucosamine residue (NAG) (Thadathil and Velappan 2014). Endo- and exochitosanase chitosanases have been reported from a number of bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes and plants (Somashekar and Joseph 1996); however, the study of endochitosanases is more frequent than exo-acting enzymes. Frequent reports of endo-acting chitosanase enzymes can be attributed to the increasing importance of COS in various fields. Importance of study of exochitosanases has been undermined comparatively.

The end products of exochitosanase hydrolysis are Gln and NAG, which are known for their therapeutic value and used as food supplements. NAG and Gln are used for the treatment of osteoarthritis; however, hydrochloride and sulfate salts of glucosamine are bitter in taste and are avoided. NAG is sweet in taste and is preferred over Gln to be administered orally when used as food supplement, as the therapeutic activity of both the molecule is similar (Kajimoto et al. 1998). NAG and Gln are produced by acid hydrolysis of chitin/chitosan; however, this is not considered to be natural and leads to lot of toxic waste with lower yield (Sakai 1995).

Very few studies on enzymatic production of Gln and NAG have been reported in literature. Exochitosanase enzyme can be used for production of these molecules in an eco-friendly way from various chitosan substrates as they are able to release Gln and NAG from non reducing end of chitosan/chitin molecule.

A new exochitosanase enzyme was isolated from Aspergillus fumigatus IIT-004, which also showed transglycosylation activity. Enzyme was immobilized on PANNFM and was used for hydrolysis of chitosan. Isolated enzyme was also purified, characterized, immobilized and was used for chitodimer production using transglycosylation activity.


