


Introduction

Naturally occurring flavor esters are commonly used in pharmaceutical, food, fragrance, and cosmetics industries as aroma agents. Increasing industrial demand for flavor and fragrance esters is evidenced by their current global markets that stand at $21.8 billion (BBC Research 2012). This figure is projected to exceed $30 billion in 2017, with an estimated annual growth rate of 5.6 % from 2012 to 2017 (BBC Research 2012). Although these types of esters can be extracted from plant and animal sources, the procedure is not economically viable due to the minute quantities of the esters, and expensive and work-intensive process (Romero et al. 2005). On the other hand, the production of flavor esters via chemical synthesis route gives higher yield, but the process is not eco-friendly and the synthesized esters contain traces of toxic impurities, which may result in health complications (Cvjetko et al. 2012). This warrants the preferential use of biocatalytic process in the production of flavor esters.

Synthesis using microchannel reactor offers various advantages in the bioprocess design and production of fine chemicals. Among them include rapid and efficient mixing effects (Miyazaki and Maeda 2006), experimental procedure that could be precisely adjusted, high operating safety margin, and low risk of environmental pollution (Urban et al. 2006). Additionally, efficient mass and heat transfers provided by continuous flow microreactors as a result of large surface-to-volume ratio with regular flow profiles lead to improved yields and increased selectivity (Wirth 2008). Furthermore, microreactors were reported to provide superb reaction control through low system inertia attributed to the microvolume processing of the reactants at any given time (Ahmed-Omer et al. 2007). This is also said to offer a solution of less waste disposal as compared to the conventional methods (Mason et al. 2007). Due to these and many other reasons, the properties of a microreactor system are continuously being exploited for process intensification and scale-up (Roberge et al. 2005). In fact, continuous flow microreaction technology is now a recognized and efficient approach within the present biocatalytic research community (Wirth 2008).

Lipases (EC 3.1.1.3) from different organisms were reported to catalyze the synthesis of different industrially important chemicals and their intermediates (Han et al. 2011; Gumel et al. 2013a, b, c, 2015; Gumel and Annuar 2014) including flavor esters such as ethyl caproate (Alvarez-Macarie and Baratti 2000), cis-3-hexenyl acetate (Jin et al. 2012), hexyl octanoate (Lopresto et al. 2014), geraniol and citronellol (Claon and Akoh 1993), butyl-hexanoate (Talon et al. 1996), butyl-acetate, and propyl-acetate esters (Mahapatra et al. 2009). Similarly, Cvjetko et al. reported the use of Candida antarctica lipase B to catalyze the synthesis of isoamyl acetate in packed bed microreactor (Mason et al. 2007). Despite their industrial significance as natural flavor esters, the syntheses of methyl butanoate and methyl benzoate (oil of niobe) via enzymatic catalysis were scarcely studied. While emerging as one of a more versatile hydrolases for the applications in industrial fields (De Maria et al. 2007), the utilization of lipase from Thermomyces lanuginosus (Lecitase Ultra™ also known as Lipase TL) as catalyst in esterification reaction is not fully explored. This is even more so in continuous flow microreactor system where its application has never been investigated. In this study, we reported the enzyme-mediated syntheses of methyl butanoate and methyl benzoate flavor esters in continuous flow microreactor using lipase TL. Characterization of the synthesized esters and kinetic behavior of their syntheses were also investigated.

Materials

Lipase from Thermomyces lanuginosus (Lecitase Ultra™) with commercial activity of 10 LU mL−1 was purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Prod. No. L3295), and benzoic acid and NaCl crystal window (Z112100-1EA) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, USA. Dichloromethane, butyric acid, and methanol were purchased from Merck Millipore, Germany. All materials used were of analytical grade. Vibrio viscometer SV-10 (A & D Company Ltd., Japan) was used to measure the fluidic dynamic viscosity.


