
Abstract

In the present study, 20 sandalwood (Santalum album L.) genotypes were characterized using RAPD, ISSR and SSR markers. Twenty-five RAPD and twenty-one ISSR primers that generated clear and reproducible banding patterns amplified 225 and 208 bands, respectively, among 20 sandalwood genotypes. Out of 225, 181 (83.13 %) RAPD bands were polymorphic while out of 208, 156 (75.77 %) ISSR bands were polymorphic. The average polymorphism information content (PIC) for RAPD and ISSR was 0.84 and 0.86, respectively. A good correlation (0.96) was observed between the matrices produced by RAPD and ISSR primers. Though, there was high similarity among genotypes (0.79 for RAPD and 0.70 for ISSR), the observed genetic diversity was found good enough for the characterization of sandalwood genotypes. Cross-species transferability SSR markers developed in S. austrocaledonicum and S. insulare were found to be monomorphic. The results of the present investigation would provide valid guidelines for collection, conservation and characterization of sandalwood genetic resources.



Introduction

Sandalwood (Santalum album L; 2n = 20) is one of the important tropical trees which is commercially known for its fragrance (Shashidhara et al. 2003). It is member of family Santalaceae and being as perfumery material it is commonly known as chandan. It is a small- to medium-sized hemiparasitic tree, distributed rather widely in India. Sandalwood is mostly confined to the South Indian states, especially Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, and is indigenous to Peninsular India (Srinivasan et al. 1992).

S. album or Indian sandalwood is of great commercial value due to its fragrant heartwood which yields unique oil preferred for perfumeries, cosmetics, medicines and also in incense sticks industries. Sandalwood oil has antipyretic, antiseptic, antiscabietic, and diuretic properties and is also effective in the treatment of bronchitis, cystitis, dysuria, and diseases of the urinary tract. The seeds are used as diuretic, hypotensive, antitumorigenic, antiviral agents, and for treating a number of skin diseases (Kirthikar and Basu 1987; Desai and Shankaranarayana 1990).

Globally, with high economic value of sandalwood and its oil, sandalwood wealth in forests are declining due to overharvesting and illegal poaching in natural habitats (Naseer et al. 2012). This alarming genetic erosion condition indicates that there is need to conserve this commercially important tree species. To protect the species, efforts have been made to establish ex situ conservation gardens for sandalwood in India (Rao et al. 2011). But the conservation efforts and planning suffer from lack of information on the level and structure of natural genetic variability of sandalwood populations (Rao 2004). Hence, to examine the existing genetic variability, there is urgent need for systematic variability study in sandalwood.

Initially, isozymes served as reliable markers for genetic analysis in sandalwood (Rao et al. 1998, 2007a; Angadi et al. 2003) but this biochemical based marker was relatively low in abundance hence revealed low polymorphism. Moreover, like phenotypic markers, isozymes may also be affected by environmental conditions depending on the type of tissue used for the analysis. On the contrary, PCR-based molecular/DNA markers like RAPD, ISSR and SSR are dispersed throughout the genomes, more polymorphic due to its abundance, environmentally independent and are easier to analyse. A number of studies have been conducted to understand the genetic diversity of sandal using random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD) (Shashidhara et al. 2003; Suma and Balasundaran 2004; Azeez et al. 2009), simple sequence repeat markers (SSRs) (Mohammed et al. 2012) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) (Byrne et al. 2003). Due to unavailability of native SSR, most of the diversity analysis studies in sandalwood were conducted independently with RAPD, ISSR and cross-species transferable SSR markers. However, none has tried to assess the comparative accuracy and reproducibility of different markers for the characterization of sandalwood for better depiction of genetic diversity of sandalwood. The present investigation was initiated with the objective to assess and compare the efficiency of RAPD, ISSR and SSR markers in assessment of genetic diversity prevalent in Indian sandalwood collection.


