
Abstract

All toxic metals have been known to inhibit different activities of sulphate-reducing bacteria (SRB) at different concentrations. The present study delineates functional responses of two thermophilic SRB species (Desulfotomaculum reducens-HA1 and Desulfotomaculum hydrothermale-HA2) to toxic metals. Bacterial activity was assessed in terms of sulphate reduction and metal precipitation employing four concentrations (1, 5, 10 and 15 ppm) of three dissolved toxic metals (Cu, Cr and Ni) independently. Both sulphidogenic bacterial species showed results in a very narrow range of fluctuations. In general, bioprecipitation and sulphate reduction were pronounced at lower concentrations (1 and 5 ppm) and got inhibited at higher concentrations (10 and 15 ppm). The order of precipitation and sulphate reduction for the subject metals was Ni > Cr > Cu. The findings of this study will be helpful in developing economical and environmental friendly bioremediation process(es) tending to operate at extreme conditions around the concentrations in indicated suitable metals-loaded effluents.



Introduction

A plenty of multidimensional anthropogenic activities especially associated with mining and other industrial processes are introducing metals continuously into the environment. Direct and indirect deleterious effects of metal ions to the environment and human health are well known (Goyer and Clarkson 2001; Landis and Yu 2004; Kucukatay et al. 2007; Mortazavi and Jafari-Javid 2009; Becker et al. 2010; Si et al. 2015). Therefore, treatment of these metallic pollutants is much necessary before discharging them to the environment. The most widely used method for the removal of metals’ ions is chemical neutralization and being expensive and possible generation of secondary pollutants, its application is question marked (Saeed and Iqbal 2003; Rocha et al. 2009). Biological treatment of metal-loaded effluents is an attractive alternative. The major advantages of the biological methods are their better performance, low operational cost, minimum generation of secondary pollutants and environmentally compatible natures (Malik 2004; Okoh and Trejo-Hernandez 2006). Implication of dissimilatory sulphate-reducing bacteria (DSRB) in detoxifying metal contaminated environments has gained importance among all the biological methods practiced for the removal of metals in the last decade (Neculita et al. 2007; Martins et al. 2009; Alexandrino et al. 2011; Barbosa et al. 2014).

SRB make morphologically and physiologically a diverse group of strict anaerobes. Under anaerobic conditions, they dissimilate sulphate to sulphide while utilizing various types of low molecular weight substrates (including various environmental contaminants) as source of carbon and energy (Willis et al. 1997; Hussain and Qazi 2012, 2014; Hussain et al. 2014a, b). The biogenic sulphide, thus produced, reacts vigorously with certain metals dissolved in contaminated waters forming sparingly soluble metal sulphides (White et al. 2003; Costa and Duarte 2005; Vega-López et al. 2007; Jameson et al. 2010) and, as a result, the concentrations of sulphates and dissolved metals are reduced.

Heavy metals are generally more or less toxic to all types of microorganisms including SRB (Sani et al. 2001; Cabrera et al. 2006). The toxic concentrations of heavy metals to SRB range from a few ppm to as much as 100 ppm (Utgikar et al. 2002). The resistance of SRB to certain metals varies with the species and depends on the concentration of the metal in solution, which can be bacteriostatic or bactericidal. Therefore, a search for metal resistant SRB is much important for the development of efficient bioremediation processes based on the use of these bacteria (Martins et al. 2009).

During the last three decades, a thorough research has been made to decode almost all modes of microbial metal interactions in mesophilic microorganisms for their capable and powerful applications in various bioremediation processes, while the potency of thermophilic microorganisms has largely been unexplored. Thus, thorough and concentrated inquiries on thermophilic microbial metal resistance and their different ways of metal mutual actions can enrich our present knowledge for the improvement of metal bioremediation strategies (Hetzer et al. 2006; Poli et al. 2009; Chatterjee et al. 2010; Sheoran et al. 2010; Ozdemir et al. 2012).

The above highlighted facts reinforce the primary consideration of thermophilic microbial metal interactions at all levels including characterization of inhabitant thermophilic microorganisms and their modes of interactions with metals for designing bioremediation strategies associated with high temperature and other stressful factors. Adequate literature is available on the interaction of mesophilic SRB with toxic metals. However, data on the thermophilic sulphate-reducing bacterial interactions with metals are quite meagre. Pertaining to the context, the present study was designed to probe into the effect haphazardly chosen three toxic metals (Cu, Cr and Ni) on two thermophilic SRB species.


