
Abstract

The present study describes the rapid and efficient indirect lysis method for environmental DNA extraction from athalassohaline soil by newly formulated cell extraction buffer. The available methods are mostly based on direct lysis which leads to DNA shearing and co-extraction of extra cellular DNA that influences the community and functional analysis. Moreover, during extraction of DNA by direct lysis from athalassohaline soil, it was observed that, upon addition of poly ethylene glycol (PEG), isopropanol or absolute ethanol for precipitation of DNA, salt precipitates out and affecting DNA yield significantly. Therefore, indirect lysis method was optimized for extraction of environmental DNA from such soil containing high salts and low microbial biomass (CFU 4.3 × 104 per gram soil) using newly formulated cell extraction buffer in combination with low and high speed centrifugation. The cell extraction buffer composition and its concentration were optimized and PEG 8000 (1 %; w/v) and 1 M NaCl gave maximum cell mass for DNA extraction. The cell extraction efficiency was assessed with acridine orange staining of soil samples before and after cell extraction. The efficiency, reproducibility and purity of extracted DNA by newly developed procedure were compared with previously recognized methods and kits having different protocols including indirect lysis. The extracted environmental DNA showed better yield (5.6 ± 0.7 μg g−1) along with high purity ratios. The purity of DNA was validated by assessing its usability in various molecular techniques like restriction enzyme digestion, amplification of 16S rRNA gene using PCR and UV–Visible spectroscopy analysis.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0383-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The molecular analysis of community DNA is the ultimate route to study the diversity of microbial wealth and genetic variation in natural conditions, to recover novel genes for understanding their metabolic functions, to track metabolic pathways and genetic adaptations for surviving under various environmental conditions (Kakirde et al. 2010; Delmont et al. 2012; Qu et al. 2009; Cary et al. 2010; Sharma et al. 2014). Subsequently, extraction of highly pure and unbiased environmental DNA is very fundamental and significant process. It requires basic understanding of physicochemical properties of soil (viz. organic content, presence of metal ions, salts, etc.) that always hinders the effectiveness of various treatment procedures and chemicals used during DNA extraction, which inturn affects the quality and quantity of extracted environmental DNA (Lombard et al. 2011; Young et al. 2014). Moreover, every environmental sample has its own set of physicochemical composition and biomass abundance. Therefore, every type of soil needs protocol optimization for environmental DNA extraction.

Many studies have demonstrated the extraction of environmental DNA from different types of environments. Various approaches like direct lysis, freeze–thaw lysis (Herrick et al. 1993), bead beating (Miller et al. 1999; Courtois et al. 2001; Petric et al. 2011; Urakawa et al. 2010), liquid nitrogen grinding (Ranjard et al. 1998), ultrasonication (Picard et al. 1992), hot detergent treatment (Holben 1994), use of strong chaotropic agents like guanidinium salts (Porteous et al. 1997), and high concentration of lysozyme treatment (Hilger and Myrold 1991) have been applied for environmental DNA extraction. Generally, the direct lysis method is believed to cause DNA shearing and also fails to remove impurities including humic acid, fulvic acid, metal ions and salts, the major interfering agents in molecular analysis. Therefore, it needs additional purification step, which ultimately lowers the DNA yield. Moreover, the biasness and shearing effect due to direct lysis method limit the use of environmental DNA in large insert-based library preparation and also its use on the next generation sequencing platform. Therefore, developing an indirect lysis method is the utmost requirement for metagenomics-mediated community analysis. Many reports clearly describe the advantages of indirect methods over direct lysis method (Zapata et al. 2010; Qiao et al. 2013; Delmont et al. 2011). Since microbial cell extraction is the key step of the indirect lysis method, the formulation of extraction buffer and the primary need to establish indirect lysis-based DNA extraction protocol are highly imperative.

In the present study, we have demonstrated an indirect lysis-based DNA extraction method by formulating PEG-NaCl-based cell extraction buffer with a promising efficiency of microbial cell extraction/recovery from athalassohaline soil samples. PEG is amphiphilic in nature, which thought to interact with cells and it was observed that cell wall absorbs high amounts of PEG that may be responsible for cell dissociation from soil particles. The success of the protocol was verified by comparing the quality and quantity of extracted environmental DNA with that of three commercially available DNA extraction kits namely NucleoSpin Soil, ZR soil Microbe DNA (both kits are based on direct lysis) and XcelGen Soil gDNA Isolation kit (based on indirect lysis), and three widely used DNA extraction methods, beat beating method (Miller et al. 1999), hot detergent lysis method (Desai and Madamwar 2006) and indirect lysis method employing high concentration of lysozyme with hot detergent lysis (Gabor et al. 2003).


