
Abstract

Littleseed canarygrass (Phalaris minor Retz.) is one of the most common and troublesome weeds infesting wheat crop in India. Repeated use during the last two decades of the ACCase-inhibiting herbicide (clodinafop) to control this weed has resulted in the occurrence of resistance. Fifty-three P. minor populations were collected from wheat fields in Haryana and Punjab states of India. The dose–response assays indicated that 29 populations were resistant, 23 populations were susceptible and one population was moderately resistant to clodinafop. Sequence analysis of the CT domain of ACCase gene among resistant and susceptible populations revealed two non-synonymous mutations, Trp2027 to Cys and Ile2041 to Asn in the resistant populations. Allele-specific PCR markers were developed to differentiate between wild-type and resistant codons at positions 2027 and 2041 of ACCase in P. minor which enables molecular assays for rapid detection and resistance diagnosis for efficient weed management in wheat. This is the first report from India of a target site mutation corresponding to resistance to clodinafop in P. minor.



Introduction

Littleseed canarygrass (Phalaris minor Retz.) is the most dominant winter season weed in wheat and widely distributed in wheat growing regions of the world. This weed has been reported from Macronesia to Mediterranean, Irano-Turanic and Saharo-Sindic regions, eastern and South Africa, North and South America, Australia and the Far East (Singh et al. 1999). In India, it is the major weed of the north-western and eastern Indo-Gangetic Plains (Chhokar and Sharma 2008). Up until the early 1990s, P. minor was effectively controlled by isoproturon, a substituted urea herbicide, but after long period of continuous and heavy spraying along with poor application rates, spray techniques and timing led to the evolution of isoproturon resistance in P. minor (Malik and Singh 1995; Chhokar and Malik 2002). In 1997–1978, four alternative herbicides (sulfosulfuron, clodinafop, fenoxaprop and tralkoxydim) were recommended for its control and the majority of farmers accepted clodinafop due to excellent crop safety and efficacy against this weed. The excessive dependence on clodinafop resulted in evolution of weed resistance against this herbicide. At present, this weed has evolved multiple herbicide resistance across three modes of actions: photosynthesis at the photosystem II site A, acetyl CoA carboxylase and acetolactate synthase inhibition (Chhokar and Sharma 2008). Herbicide resistance in weeds is an evolutionary process and its dynamics and impact are dependent on several factors such as genetics and biology of weeds along with herbicidal, operational and other biological components (Powels and Yu 2010). There are currently 418 unique cases (species x site of action) of herbicide-resistant weeds globally, with 224 species (129 dicots and 95 monocots). Weeds have evolved resistance to 21 of the 25 known herbicide sites of action and to 149 different herbicides. Herbicide-resistant weeds have been reported in 73 crops in 61 countries (Heap 2014).

Aryloxyphenoxypropionate (APP) and cyclohexanedione (CHD) herbicides inhibit plastid form of acetyl-CoA carboxylase by blocking the fatty acid biosynthesis which results in disruption of cell membrane integrity and consequently causing metabolite leakage and rapid plant death (Devine and Shimabukuro 1994). Acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase (ACCase) (EC.6.4.1.2) is a key enzyme in fatty acid biosynthesis catalyzing ATP-dependent carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA. All ACCase isoforms contain three distinct functional domains: the biotin carboxyl carrier (BCC) as structural domain, and the biotin carboxylase (BC) and the carboxyl transferase (CT) domains as catalytic domains (Nikolau et al. 2003). The ACCase enzyme activity is inhibited by APP and CHD herbicides by binding within the CT domain of the plastidic ACCase in susceptible plant species and thus the CT domain of the ACCase gene determines the herbicide sensitivity in plants (Nikolskaya et al. 1999). Several point mutations have been reported in the CT domain of plastid-localized ACCase responsible for the enzyme insensitivity to herbicides in several grass weeds (reviewed by Kukorelli et al. 2013; Beckie and Tardif 2012; Powles and Yu 2010). Therefore, the search for mutations endowing ACCase herbicide resistance was conducted by sequencing the CT domain of the plastidic ACCase gene in P. minor. In this study, we elucidated that the amino acid substitutions in CT domain of plastidic ACCase gene are associated with herbicide resistance in P. minor. Allele-specific PCR-based test further confirmed the differentiation of herbicide-resistant and susceptible populations.


