
Abstract

Drought stress is a severe environmental constraint to plant productivity. In this study, gene expression of WRKY1 and EREBP1 genes and activity of two enzymes were investigated in two genotypes, G9 (as resistance) and G12 (as susceptible) of 10 days-old lemon balm seedlings. Experiments were done according to factorial design on the base of completely randomized design with three replications for expression analysis and enzyme assays. Seedlings were cultured in MS medium suspensions, including 0, 3, 6, 12 and 15 % w/v PEG 6000. Leaf samples were subsequently collected at 0, 3, 6, 24, 48, 72 h after culture. According to the results of the enzyme assay, SOD activity in resistant genotype was more than in sensitive one. POD activity was high in G9 in severe drought condition and in G12 this activity was increased at initial times of drought stress. The survey results revealed that the expression levels of both genes, EREBP1 and WRKY1, in G9 variety were more than G12, and in this respect we can say that the G9 variety is more resistant to drought.





Discussion

In the susceptible genotype, the maximum SOD activity was observed 6 h after stress and the minimum was observed 48 h after stress (Fig. 1a). In the tolerant genotype, SOD activity was much more than the susceptible one in the same conditions 6 h after stress. In an experiment on wheat, Zhang and Kirkham showed that SOD activity increased at the beginning of drought stress, but with long periods of drought, the activity of this enzyme was reduced. It appears that increasing the activity of superoxide dismutase in the early stages of drought stress, protects plants from oxidative damage. Decrease or no change in SOD activity after prolonged drought shows that the SOD is not solely responsible for the act of removing ROS in resistant genotype. Thus, by increasing the activity of SOD in the early stages of drought stress, the cleaning intensity of superoxide ion is increased and the damage to the plant will be decreased. In general, researchers reported increase, decrease or no change in SOD activity in different species under drought stress (Gunes et al. 2008; Tohidi-Moghadam et al. 2009).

In the susceptible genotype, the maximum POD activity was observed 6 h after stress. According to the results it can be concluded that POD enzyme activity in the tolerant genotype was increased under severe drought stress. It appears that POD exerts its protective role in the tolerant genotype under severe stress conditions. Khanna-Chopra and Selote reported that POD activity in tolerant wheat varieties was higher than in susceptible ones. Mercado et al. showed that POD activity is associated with the ability of maintaining more water in leaves. Similar to what was observed in SOD, in the susceptible genotype, POD was activated faster than in the tolerant one. Increase in POD enzyme activity is definitely a response of the plant to ROS accumulation. It also should be mentioned that there are several enzymatic and non-enzymatic mechanisms of resistance of plants to drought stress.

RNA was extracted using phenol/SDS method with slight modification. This method was based on phenol without using guanidium salts. This buffer contains phenol, SDS, EDTA and sodium acetate salt. SDS and EDTA are inhibitors of RNase and phenol is a strong protein denaturing agent which inhibits the activity of RNase (Wang and Stegemann 2010). In addition to the performance of each buffer component in this method, the substances available in the buffer led to creation of an environment that prevents the oxidation of phenolic compounds and removes them from the extraction buffer. This raises the possibility that RNA can be free of quinone/protein complexes and therefore the extraction and integration of the RNA plate can be easily done (Ghawana et al. 2011). Overall, based on studies, it can be concluded that compared to other methods, phenol/SDS method is more suitable for medicinal plants. Another advantage of the phenol/SDS compared to other methods is relatively short extraction time (approximately 45 min) and low cost of consumables (Accerbi et al. 2010).

Our research confirms Ashida et al. results; they showed the role of EREBP1 in drought stress. Expression of EREBP1 was also increased in their study. Liu and Zhu investigated the role of EREBP1 in plants which were exposed to drought stress. In their study, the expression of this gene was increased in the early hours of exposure of plants to drought stress, which somehow confirms our results. This gene has some noticeable roles in other plants: Its role in expression of genes related to ethylene in tobacco (Ohme-Takagi and Shinshi 1995), expression of genes associated with ethylene and flower development in Arabidopsis (Jofuku et al. 1994) and its essential role when plants are exposed to cold stress have already been demonstrated (Stockinger et al. 1997). Our study, demonstrated the role of this gene in exposure to drought stress.

Drought, which is often associated with salinity, is an important abiotic stressing factor that has a significant impact on growth, development, survival and function of plants. Thus, understanding the complex mechanisms of drought and salinity is important for agriculture and breeding programs. It has been shown that several WRKY proteins are involved in response to drought and salinity (Golldack et al. 2011). For example, overexpression of OsWRKY11 under the control of HSP101 promoter leads to increased drought resistance, as a reducing agent of wilting leaves, and increases the longevity of green parts of the plant (Wu et al. 2009). Similarly, increased resistance to drought and salinity in Arabidopsis may be attributed to induction of ABA stress-related genes by OsWRK72 (Qiu and Yu 2009; Song et al. 2010). OsWRKY08, when its transcripts are increased by PEG, salt or abscisic acid (ABA), is essential for improved tolerance to drought stress in transgenic Arabidopsis via positive regulation of two independent abiotic stress responses genes, ABA, AtCOR47 and AtRD21 (Song et al. 2009). Plants that have overexpression of GmWRKY54, show high tolerance to drought and salinity stress, which is probably through the regulation of STZ/Zat10 transcription factor; overexpression of GmWRKY13 leads to increased sensitivity to salt and mannitol stress (Zhou et al. 2008).

New findings illustrate that WRKY proteins often act as repressors as well as activators, and that members of the family play roles in both the repression and de-repression of important plant processes. Like our study, (Mondini et al. 2011) concluded that this transcription factor plays an important role in tolerance to drought and salinity in wheat. The gene acts as a positive regulator of defense responses against pathogens. According to transcription profile, it can be concluded that G9 was more tolerant to drought.
