
Abstract

Paddy is a staple crop and being grown in major parts of India, but similarly it is facing some major challenges like abiotic stresses (drought, salinity, etc.) by which its productivity is greatly affected. De-husked seeds of 21 cultivars of indica rice were cultured onto MS medium for screening of their micropropagation capabilities. All the selected cultivars are being cultivated by farmers of Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan states of India, these cultivars bear good quality of grain and high yield. Similarly, both states are facing the problem of drought so; we selected these cultivars for the micropropagation and transformation studies. The induction of callus and regeneration in these selected cultivars were achieved on MS culture medium with supplementation of various growth regulators. Maximum callus induction and regeneration frequency were observed in Sambha mahsuri at the concentration of 3.0 mg L−1 of 2,4-D and BAP (5.0 mg L−1) while the moderate response achieved in other cultivars of rice. Sambha mahsuri showed promising results in terms of callus induction frequency, and regeneration potentialities of embryogenic callus so, there is need to develop a rice cultivars that could thrive under drought condition if the country is to sustain rice production. Finally, regenerated plantlets were successfully transferred to natural conditions (in pots) after acclimatization.



Introduction

Oryza sativa L. is the most economically important cultivated rice species of the Oryzeae tribe of Poaceae family. Rice is the world’s single most important staple food crop, and it represents a primary food for more than one-third of its population (Ilahi et al. 2005). Tissue culture techniques have become necessary for the production of the transgenic rice plants (Peng et al. 1992), hybrids (Mariam et al. 1996), and for the recovery of germplasm when seed availability is limited. These methods are based on adventitious shoot culture (Shahsavari 2011) and somatic embryogenesis (Amarasinghe 2009) which resulted into genetic variations in rice cultivars (Mannan et al. 2013). Micropropagation protocols have been established for japonica and indica rice cultivars using as explants like as mature seeds (Ullah et al. 2007), shoot segments (Verma et al. 2011), embryos (Ali et al. 2004; Evangelista et al. 2009), anthers (Khatun et al. 2010) which produced regenerated plantlets. Fifteen rice cultivars of indica rice were screened for induction of callus as well as subsequent regeneration of plantlets through plant tissue culture (Hertke and Lörz 1989). Similarly, 500 cultivars of rice were comprehensively studied for the induction of callus as well as regeneration of plantlets by Kamia et al.. It was also reported that an individual genotype of rice plays a significant role in the induction of callus and regeneration of plantlets (Hoque and Mansfield 2004; Islam et al. 2005). Sambha mahsuri, Cotton Dora sannalu, PR-115 and PR-116 are high yielding cultivars in Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan states of India so, we focused our study on these cultivars of indica rice.



Discussion

In the current study, 21 cultivars of indica rice were used for micropropagation through de-husked seeds. The effects of 2,4-D were studied and observed that 2,4-D enhanced the frequency of induction and growth of callus (Deo et al. 2009). Similarly, in Sambha mahsuri cultivar, maximum multiple shoots regeneration was achieved in supplementation of MS + BAP (5.0 mg L−1). Simultaneously, stimulatory effects of BAP in combination with IAA and NAA have previously been reported to facilitate regeneration in indica rice cell cultures (Mandal et al. 2003; Karthekeyan et al. 2009). The observed results revealed that kinetin was found to be effective for the induction and proliferation of shoots and roots. This may be because cytokinin causes development of single pole and formation of meristematic dome from which the shoot primordium develops. The role of cytokinins on somatic embryogenesis has been explained by enhanced cell division of pre-embryogenically determined cells (Kintzois et al. 2002). In addition to these reports, kinetin increases proliferation and regeneration of callus by affecting mitosis, cytokinesis, total protein synthesis, lignin biosynthesis, vascular differentiation and differentiation of mature chloroplast from protoplastids (Wan et al. 1988).

An important aspect of the present protocol was that all the plantlets regenerated from mature embryo-derived calli developed good root system. Moreover, after transferring to pots, in vitro regenerated plantlets of four cultivars survived, which in turn indicated good adaptability of somaclones in ambient environmental conditions. High auxin concentration leads to development of root primordium leading to root development. However, one of our cultivar Sambha mahsuri decreases in root development at high auxin concentration. Thus, in turn, suggested that genotypes also possessed variability in their capability of regeneration as reported in previous studies (Kumaria et al. 2000). The present study establishes a successful protocol for the induction and growth of callus, somatic embryogenesis in four diverse cultivars (PR-115, PR-116, Sambha mahsuri, and Erramallelu) of Indian sub-continent, and the in vitro regenerated plants were showed yield potential at par to that of direct seeded plants in ambient conditions. The present protocol would be useful for genetic transformation in elite genotypes of rice using any selected gene transfer method in near future.
