
Abstract

The continuous discharge of cyanide-containing effluents to the environment has necessitated for the development of environmentally benign treatment processes that would result in complete detoxification of the cyanide-containing wastewaters, without producing additional environmental toxicants. Since biological detoxification of hazardous chemical compounds has been renowned for its robustness and environmental-friendliness, the ability of the Exiguobacterium acetylicum (GenBank accession number KT282229) and Bacillus marisflavi (GenBank accession number KR016603) to co-metabolise thiocyanate (SCN−) and free cyanide (CN−) under alkaline conditions was evaluated. E. acetylicum had an SCN− degradation efficiency of 99.9 % from an initial SCN− concentration of 150 mg SCN−/L, but the organism was unable to degrade CN−. Consequently, B. marisflavi had a CN− degradation efficiency of 99 % from an initial concentration of 200 mg CN−/L. Similarly, the organism was unable to degrade SCN−; hence, this resulted in the evaluation of co-metabolism of SCN− and CN− by the two microbial species. Optimisation of operational conditions was evaluated using response surface methodology (RSM). A numeric optimisation technique was used to evaluate the optimisation of the input variables i.e. pH, temperature, SCN− and CN− concentrations. The optimum conditions were found to be as follows: pH 9.0, temperature 34 °C, 140 mg SCN−/L and 205 mg CN−/L under which complete SCN− and CN− degradation would be achieved over a 168-h period. Using the optimised data, co-metabolism of SCN− and CN− by both E. acetylicum and B. marisflavi was evaluated, achieving a combined degradation efficiency of ≥99.9 %. The high degradative capacity of these organisms has resulted in their supplementation on an active continuous biological degradation system that is treating both SCN− and CN−.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0491-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Cyanide is a naturally occurring compound which is produced by a variety of living organisms, such as fungi, plants, bacteria and algae (Luque-Almagro et al. 2005), and is also existent in the stratosphere and non-urban troposphere as a result of natural activities such as gases from volcanoes and burning of biomass. The contribution of these natural activities to cyanide contamination in the environment is insignificant as compared to anthropogenic activities. Anthropogenic activities contribute significantly to environmental deterioration because of the vast utilisation of cyanide compounds, which in turn generate extensive cyanide-containing wastewaters. Several industries such as the mineral processing, mining, electroplating and pharmaceutical industries contribute significantly to cyanide production worldwide. However, the mining industry accounts for 90 % cyanide utilisation, making it the largest cyanide utilising industry (Hu et al. 2015; Kitis et al. 2005; Kuyucak and Akcil 2013). Briefly, cyanide is used as a lixiviant for the recovery of gold, silver, and base metals (Cu, Ni, Zn, etc.) from gold-bearing ores in a process known as the cyanidation process (Habashi 1966, 1967). Gold-bearing ores are classified as sulphide ores, mainly due to the high presence of sulphides in such ores. During cyanidation, cyanide reacts with a variety of chemical constituents within the ore, thus forming a variety of cyanide complexes. The major chemical constituents found post-cyanidation are free cyanide (CN−) and thiocyanate (SCN−). SCN− is formed as a result of CN− reaction with sulphides and partially oxidised sulphur intermediates (Gould et al. 2012). The co-existence of CN− and SCN− in wastewaters is detrimental to both the environmental and living organisms, including humans.

Cyanide can be removed using chemical, photolytic, electrolytic, catalytic, ultrasonic and biological methods (Mudder et al. 2001; Sarla et al. 2004; Baxter and Cummings 2006). Biological methods have been proven to be environmentally friendly, robust and cost effective. Additionally, this method does not produce by/end-products that contribute to environmental destruction as compared to the aforementioned methods. In this process, CN− and SCN− are metabolised by microbial species to form ammonia, carbon dioxide and sulphates. The success of such a process lies in the ability of the microbial species to be applied in situ, under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions, in active and passive systems, and in suspended and attached growth systems (Akcil and Mudder 2003; Akcil et al. 2003). Furthermore, the microbial species can be manipulated to handle large influent flows and tolerate high CN− and SCN− concentrations, allowing for the uptake, catalysis, sorption and/or precipitation of CN−, SCN−, weak and strong acid dissociable cyanide complexes. However, this method has been hindered by the lack of thorough understanding of the individual microbial species, including the detoxification mechanism, which contributes to the successful degradation of CN− and SCN− (Huddy et al. 2015). The understanding of the intrinsic metabolic contributions of individual microbial species within a CN− and SCN− degrading consortia is paramount and, to achieve this, the metabolic activities of individual species need to be understood as these species employ different metabolic pathways for the degradation of CN− and SCN−. These metabolic pathways include the hydrolytic, oxidative, reduction and substitution/transfer pathways (Gupta et al. 2010; Ebbs 2004; Dash et al. 2009). This information would add to the design of a high-strength microbial consortia that would ensure the maximum degradation of cyano-containing compounds. Some of the microbial species such as Klebsiella oxytoca are able to produce methane from CN− degradation (Kao et al. 2003), thus demonstrating the economic value that can be achieved from biological degradation processes.

Individual microbial species have been explored for the degradation of CN− and SCN− and these include, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Yersinia sp., Serratia marcescens AQ07, Aspergillus awamori, Burkholderia phytofirmans, Fusarium oxysporum, Thiobacillus thioparus, Trametes versicolor, Bacillus pumilus and many other organisms (Chaudhari and Kodam 2009; Santos et al. 2013; Cabuk et al. 2006; Katayama et al. 1992; Meyers et al. 1991; Karamba et al. 2016; Vu et al. 2013; Akinpelu et al. 2016; Mpongwana et al. 2016). The CN− and SCN− degradative capacity of Exiguobacterium acetylicum and Bacillus marisflavi has never been reported before. Hence, this study focused on the co-metabolism of CN− and SCN− by E. acetylicum and B. marisflavi under alkaline conditions.



Discussion

The present paper is the first report on the cyanide degrading capacity of B. marisflavi and thiocyanate biodegradation by E. acetylicum. Since B. marisflavi was unable to degrade SCN− and the incapacity of E. acetylicum to degrade CN−, a co-metabolism study was undertaken to assess the effectiveness of co-culturing for the overall biodegradation of both CN− and SCN− in the same media. The co-cultures effectively degraded CN− and SCN− under alkaline conditions. Chaudhari and Kodam have shown that a co-culture of Klebsiella pneumoniae and Ralstonia sp. was able to degrade high thiocyanate concentrations, achieving degradation rates of 500 mg L−1 h−1. Consequently, 34 °C, pH 9.0, CN− concentration of 140 mg CN−/L and SCN− concentration of 205 mg SCN−/L were determined to be the appropriate physicochemical conditions for the maximum co-metabolism of CN− and SCN−. Through RSM, Bacillus sp. CN-22 was observed to have optimum conditions at pH 10.3 and temperature of 31 °C, and CN-22 was able to tolerate up to 700 mg CN−/L. Bacillus species have been observed to be highly tolerant to high CN− concentration in batch and continuous systems. Mekuto et al. assessed a consortia of Bacillus sp. in a continuous mode using a packed bed reactor under RSM-optimised conditions of: pH 9.88 and temperature of 33.8 °C. The authors observed a degradation efficiency of over 99 % when CN− concentration was gradually increased from 100 to 500 mg CN−/L over a period of 80 days. E. acetylicum and B. marisflavi have been observed to be tolerant to CN− and SCN− concentrations of 300 mg CN−/L and 300 mg SCN−/L in the same media (see Table 2), making these organisms one of the few that tolerate the co-existence of CN− and SCN− at high concentrations. Furthermore, there are limited studies on SCN− degradation under alkaline conditions. A symbiotic relationship was observed between the two organisms. This may be as a result of the close genetic relatedness of the species belonging to the Exiguobacterium and Bacillus genera (Farrow et al. 1992, 1994; Yumoto et al. 2004), thus resulting in the observed compatibility of the two organisms.
