




Discussion

Application of enzymes instead of chemicals in the industry is preferred as it provides for a cheaper and more environment friendly alternative. This study was focused on isolation and screening of bacteria from soils of Himachal Pradesh for high protease activity. Soil has served as source of numerous protease producing bacteria such as B. megaterium (Asker et al. 2013). After exhaustive screening a hyper producer of protease was selected which phenotypically resembled the earlier reported S. marcescens strain SA1 (HM136580.1). The isolate S. marcescens PPB-26 showed highest protease activity in GYC medium while lowest in M4 medium (soybean meal medium). Soybean has anti-trypsin inhibitors which reduce the protein digesting capability (Haard et al. 1996). Among different carbon sources, glucose was the most preferred while sucrose, fructose and galactose were least preferred for protease production by S. marcescens PPB-26. Glucose has previously been reported as a suitable carbon source for protease production in S. marcescens (Mohankumar 2011). Joshi et al. reported fructose as preferred carbon source for protease production by B. cereus MTCC 6840. Among nitrogen sources, organic sources were better for protease production than inorganic sources which resulted in decreased protease activity. A similar trend has been reported in serration peptidase enzyme of S. marcescens (Mohankumar 2011). Of different metal ions studied most showed no effect on enzyme activity except manganese chloride which had an inhibitory effect and calcium chloride which increased protease activity. Metal ions stabilize and enhance the production and activity of protease enzyme (Janssen et al. 1994). Calcium has been reported to enhance protease production in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Marquart et al. 2005). Not many reports of statistical optimization of protease production have been reported. In this study S. marcescens PPB-26 protease production was optimized using the Response Surface Methodology. Factorial designing increased the production by 1.75 fold (75 %). In P. aeruginosa MCM B3271.3 fold increase was reported (Zambare et al. 2013).

Serratia marcescens PPB-26 protease showed activity in pH range of 6–9 with maximum activity at pH 7.5 in 1.5 M Tris–HCl buffer. Ionic strength of buffer did not have much effect on the enzyme activity. Optimum temperature for enzyme activity was found to be 30 °C, at higher temperatures beyond 40 °C the activity decreased. The enzyme faced product inhibition at concentrations above 0.8 % casein due to product accumulation in the reaction mixture. Among metal ions Co2+, Zn2+ and Mn2+ had negative effect on the protease activity, whereas Fe2+ had a positive effect on it. Similar results with metal ions have been reported previously also (Yang et al. 2000). The protease of S. marcescens PPB-26 showed tolerance to high (0.9 M) NaCl concentrations. Decrease in activity at higher NaCl concentrations might be due to the precipitation of substrate at high salinities. The protease of Bacillus sp. NG-27 has also been reported to exhibit high salt tolerance (Sumandeep et al. 1999).

Organic solvents are used as reaction media for enzymes in various industrial processes due to advantages like high regio- and stereo-selectivity and minimal side-chain protection requirements (Kumar and Bhalla 2005). However, most enzymes show low activity in organic solvents due to limited diffusion, partial denaturation and reduced flexibility (Kwon et al. 1999). The protease of S. marcescens PPB-26 showed stability in all organic solvents (50 % v/v) over 24 h, except in isopropanol. This property makes it useful for industrially important applications like peptide synthesis. The enzyme showed maximum stability (95–100 %) with toxic organic solvents like methanol and ethanol, unlike the previously reported proteases of B. tequilensis P15 Bose et al. 2014) and Virgibacillus sp. EMB13 (Sinha and Khare 2012) in which the relative activity was 2 % (in methanol) and 45 % (in ethanol), respectively.
