
Abstract

To decipher an evolutionary lineage between two different but important bacterial groups, i.e., Pseudomonas strain (γ-Proteobacteria) and Frankia strain (actinobacteria) growing in the same ecological niche in and around of an actinorhizal plant Hippophae salicifolia D. Don, genetic diversity and comparative molecular phylogeny have been investigated using 16S rRNA gene sequences and computer-simulated and virtually directed restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) through 10 restriction enzymes. Bayesian and coalescent analyses on the basis of 16S rRNA gene sequences suggested three major groups with close proximity between Pseudomonas and Frankia isolates. This result has been further validated based on the data observed through similarity coefficient value and computational RFLP. Principal component analysis and Mandel h and k statistical analysis also confirmed and strengthen the findings. Approximately 458 aligned sequence of all the taxa were used to decipher nucleotide diversity, polymorphism and gene flow between these taxa. Thus, our results suggest for a possible co-evolution or a heterologous gene transfer of distantly related microbial forms. Further, our study also advocate for the use of computer aided, virtual RFLP analysis as a cost effective and rapid identification tool.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0488-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Soil provides an enormous habitat for almost all kinds of microorganisms (Roger-Estrade et al. 2010). Diversity of microbial community and their resemblance to each other is very important factor in soil microhabitat and it is very crucial and mandatory to maintain soil health and other ecological interactions (Brock et al. 1994; Liesack and Stackebrandt 1992). Bacteria are found in all kinds of environment (Mulder et al. 2005), some groups of them occur more frequently and exhibit a very wide distribution, pseudomonads are one such example belongs to γ-proteobacteria group and are found free living or attached to the soil. These soil bacteria are ubiquitous in rhizosphere and possibly interact with the roots of plants and/or vice versa (Lynch and de Leij 1990). While Frankia strains either growing in free living condition or form symbiotic association with numbers of actinorhizal plants. (Sarma et al. 2006; Singh et al. 2008, 2009, 2010). It inhabits the root nodule of the non-leguminous, angiospermic Hippophae salicifolia D. Don, distributed along the high altitude areas of the Eastern Himalayas (North Sikkim) in India. Several other microbial communities might also be exists in the surrounding rhizosphere which definitely affects the soil properties of that place. A concerted approach regarding their phylogenetic affiliation must be needed to explore and analyze their diversity.

Characterization of Pseudomonas sp. has traditionally been done either through cultivation (Gould et al. 1985; Sugimoto et al. 1990), based on genetic study and biochemical tests (Anzai et al. 2000; Grimot et al. 1996), through molecular sequence analysis (Woese et al. 1984; Rajwar and Sahgal 2016) or FAME profiling (Vancanneyt et al. 1996). Some recent studies were also utilized RFLP gel electrophoresis and computer-simulated restriction analysis for the classification of fluorescent Pseudomonas sp. from cultured or uncultured strains (Gonzalez et al. 2000; Laguerre et al. 1994). Random genome fragments and DNA microarray technology were also used (Cho and Tiedje 2001). Frankia sp. have also been characterized using physiological, biochemical, molecular approaches (Normand et al. 1996; Singh et al. 2010) and RFLP-based analyses of 16S-ITS of Frankia (Khan et al. 2009).

Although a number of molecular tools have been used to elucidate the genetic diversity among the microorganisms but small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) sequences were found to be most commonly used molecular marker for phylogenetic as well as species level characterization due to its hypervariable as well as conserved regions which helps to resolve phylogeny and variability among strains more precisely (Clarridge 2004). 16S rRNA is widely use molecular marker for depict phylogeny among strain (Sen et al. 2015). RFLP data although, provides less direct information on the evolution of DNA sequences, but restriction sites because of their variability in sequences widely used in phylogeny and diversity studies and can be used directly to reveals informative sites or footprints of any organism. Restriction enzymes (type II) with 4 or 5 base cutter have been widely used to analyze restriction patterns (Pingoud and Jeltsch 2001). Restriction digestion generates discrete operational taxonomic units (OTUs) which represent different RFLP groups of interest and were used for exploratory data analysis. Virtual gel plotting or simulation-based analysis is further a step ahead in this process and have been previously employed to assess genetic variability among phytoplasma strains (Wei et al. 2007; Cai et al. 2008), as well as to develop a comprehensive classification scheme (Lee et al. 1998, 2000). Efficiency of different restriction enzymes for detecting and differentiating bacterial taxa (OTUs) on the basis of their representative SSU rRNA gene sequence have been reported by Moyer et al.. RFLP gel electrophoresis and computer-simulated restriction analysis, for classification of fluorescent Pseudomonas sp. and bacteria have also been carried out by several workers (Gonzalez et al. 2000; Laguerre et al. 1994). Network analysis and sharing of antibiotic resistance genes between actinobacteria and γ-proteobacteria groups were analyzed previously (Tamminen et al. 2012). However, no work has been done till date that deals with the genetic diversity and evolutionary relationship among these two groups of bacteria growing in and around the root of Hippophae salicifolia D. Don. As they have shared the same ecological niche, some kind of genetic rearrangement might be possible among such microbial forms.

Therefore, the present investigation aimed to decipher the evolutionary relationship between the Pseudomonas (γ- proteobacteria) and Frankia (actinobacteria) strains using a concerted 16S rRNA gene sequence-based genetic diversity approach and bioinformatics or computer aided comparative RFLP analysis.


