
Abstract

This is the first report on the microbial diversity of xaj-pitha, a rice wine fermentation starter culture through a metagenomics approach involving Illumine-based whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing method. Metagenomic DNA was extracted from rice wine starter culture concocted by Ahom community of Assam and analyzed using a MiSeq® System. A total of 2,78,231 contigs, with an average read length of 640.13 bp, were obtained. Data obtained from the use of several taxonomic profiling tools were compared with previously reported microbial diversity studies through the culture-dependent and culture-independent method. The microbial community revealed the existence of amylase producers, such as Rhizopus delemar, Mucor circinelloides, and Aspergillus sp. Ethanol producers viz., Meyerozyma guilliermondii, Wickerhamomyces ciferrii, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Candida glabrata, Debaryomyces hansenii, Ogataea parapolymorpha, and Dekkera bruxellensis, were found associated with the starter culture along with a diverse range of opportunistic contaminants. The bacterial microflora was dominated by lactic acid bacteria (LAB). The most frequent occurring LAB was Lactobacillus plantarum, Lactobacillus brevis, Leuconostoc lactis, Weissella cibaria, Lactococcus lactis, Weissella para mesenteroides, Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides, etc. Our study provided a comprehensive picture of microbial diversity associated with rice wine fermentation starter and indicated the superiority of metagenomic sequencing over previously used techniques.



Introduction

The methodology of rice wine preparation is more or less similar among most of the ethnic communities of Assam, a north-eastern state of India; however, fermentation starters (Assamese name xaj-pitha) and the substrates differ resulting in variance in the quality of the final product (Tanti et al. 2010; Das et al. 2012). The use of fermentation starters is believed to have originated in China from where it spread to the other neighboring countries in Asia (Hanai 1992). Various local names for rice wine starters are used in Asian countries, such as banh men in Vietnam, chu in China, koji in Japan, nuruk in Korea, murcha in India, ragi in Indonesia, ragi tapai in Malaysia, and bubod in Philippines (Limtong et al. 2005). In Assam, different ethnic communities also have their own terms to refer to such fermentation starter cultures. The starters are mixed cultures of molds, yeasts, and bacteria that are maintained on substrate, such as rice powder, supplemented with various herbs.

The indigenous microbial diversity in various sources of local beverages could be a rich resource for oenological research. Few studies have reported microbial diversity of rice wine fermentation starters (Mao and Odyuo 2007; Xie et al. 2007; Rong et al. 2009; Shi et al. 2009). However, most of these studies examined the microbial community of wine starters using culture-dependent methods that might not have permitted identification of some important microbial species, as their growth requirements are unknown, and hence, a comprehensive picture of the microbial diversity in rice wine starters is yet to be reported (Thanh et al. 2008).

The first culture-independent study of starter microbiota was reported in the traditional Vietnamese alcohol fermentation starters (banh men) through Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)-based Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE) (Thanh et al. 2008). The study revealed a remarkable diversity of fungal microflora among various samples; however, the bacterial community exhibited a rather “spontaneous” species composition among the collected starters. Although culture-independent approaches, such as Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)-based amplification and sequencing of 16S rRNA genes or Denaturing Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (DGGE), have proven to be powerful tools in investigating different types of traditional fermentations (Meroth et al. 2003; Prakitchaiwattana et al. 2004; Rantsiou et al. 2005; Haruta et al. 2006), the technique is unable to reflect the overall microbial diversity due to low throughput (Ercolini 2004; Prakitchaiwattana et al. 2004). On the other hand, high-throughput sequencing (HTS) methods, such as 454 pyrosequencing and Illumina sequencing technologies, have been recently applied as novel promising methods to investigate microbial communities in different habitats. DNA-based high-throughput-sequencing metagenomics have been applied to reveal microbial communities in marine water (Gilbert et al. 2008), soil (Urich et al. 2008), oral cavities (Lazarevic et al. 2009), human guts (Qin et al. 2010), etc. HTS has also been used for exploring the microbial community structure of a variety of fermented foods and beverages; e.g., Kimchi, a traditional Korean fermented food (Jung et al. 2011), Irish soft, semi-hard, and hard cheeses (Quigley et al. 2012), Danish raw milk cheeses (Masoud et al. 2011), Kefir grains (used in fermentation of Kefir, a traditional Turkish drink) (Nalbantoglu et al. 2014), Chinese rice wine (Hong et al. 2016), etc. Moreover, HTS was also instrumental in unveiling the microbial succession of Lactobacillales and yeasts over the members of the Enterobacteriaceae in brewing American coolship ale (Bokulich et al. 2012). Based on the HTS analysis and carbohydrate utilization pattern, Lactobacillus fabifermentans was identified to be one of the most dominant bacterial species involved in grape marc fermentation (Campanaro et al. 2014). Based on these observations, it can be concluded that the HTS analysis could provide more insights into the microbial communities and also reflects their role on fermentation processes.

However, studies on microbial community diversity through metagenomics approach in rice wine culture is yet to be reported. Our study is the first of its kind to use the whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing to analyze the microbial community occurring in the starter culture traditionally used in Assamese rice wine fermentation. We aimed at identifying the key microbial communities associated with traditional starter culture (xaj-pitha) and attempted to find relatedness of the microbiota with that of the previously analyzed starters from south-east Asia.


