


Introduction

In plant cell walls, hemicelluloses are the second most abundant carbohydrates after cellulose. Mannans are the second largest group of hemicelluloses after xylan, which appear predominantly in softwoods of gymnosperms and also form a minor component of hardwoods (Puls and Schuseil 1993). These are composed of β-linked mannose sugar-based backbones with variable degrees of side substitutions. These polysaccharides are renewable resources and their enzymatic conversion is of great interest in the field of lignocellulose biotechnology (Soni and Kango 2013). For the majority of bioconversion processes, mannans must be first converted to mannose or manno-oligosaccharides (MOS).

The breakdown of the main chain of mannan is accomplished with the action of β-mannanase (1,4-β-mannan mannohydrolases EC 3.2.1.78), which releases manno-oligosaccharides. Enzymes that actively participate in mannan hydrolysis include β-mannanase (1,4-β-d-mannan mannohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.78), β-mannosidase (1,4-β-d-mannopyranoside hydrolase, EC 3.2.1.25), β-glucosidase (1,4-β-d-glucoside glucohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.21) and α-galactosidase (1,4-α-d–galactoside galactohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.22). Enzymatic synthesis of MOS from low-cost substrate like konjac gum can be developed as a cost-effective method for generating useful nutraceuticals. A bacterial mannanase MAN5 was used for MOS production form konjac flour and its prebiotic effect has also been described (Al-Ghazzewi et al. 2007). Various reports that reveal the positive effects of MOS on intestinal microflora, intestinal structure and function are available (Baurhoo et al. 2007; Chauhan et al. 2014). Certain MOS possess nutritional values; MOS-based nutrition supplements are widely used in nutrition as a natural additive (Van Zyl et al. 2010). Guar gum derived from seed endosperm of Cyamopsis tetragonolobus (guar seed) is very high in viscosity. Enzymatically generated partially hydrolyzed guar gum (PHGG) has low viscosity as compared to guar gum and thus allows its use in enteral products, providing benefits linked with dietary fiber ingestion (Alam et al. 2000; Slavin and Greenberg 2003), which makes the enzyme significant from an industrial point of view. Utilization of lignocellulosic by-products or wastes of agro-industries for the production of biofuel ethanol is very attractive (Chaturvedi and Verma 2013; Gama et al. 2015; Saini et al. 2015). Degradation of agricultural wastes such as wheat bran, wheat straw, copra meal and corn cob requires the homo- and heterosynergistic action of several enzymes. In this study, mannanase was explored for the degradation of lignocellulosic biomass into fermentable monomeric sugars that work as sugar for bioethanol production.

Many microbial β-mannanase production studies have focused on the utilization of pure mannans such as LBG, guar gum and konjac gum as inducers (Puchart et al. 2004; Vijayalaxmi et al. 2013). In addition, low-value mannan-rich substrates such as copra meal, palm kernel cake (PKC), apple pomace, coffee extract and other hemicelluosic biomass like wheat bean and wheat straw can also be used in bioprocesses (Abdeshanian et al. 2010; Kote et al. 2009; Soni et al. 2015).

This current study focused on the formulation of an economical β-mannanase production medium utilizing inexpensive crop straw or agro-industrial wastes that are available in large amounts. Initial pH and moisture content are known to play a crucial role in fungal growth and enzyme production under SSF. In the present study, statistical rotatable central composite design (RCCD) approach of response surface methodology (RSM) was applied to optimized pH and moisture content for the optimized production of mannanase. Attention was then given to the application of β-mannanase for the degradation of mannan for the generation of oligosaccharide, PHGG and saccharification of lignocellulosic biomass.


