
Abstract

Pesticides belonging to pyrethroid group are widely used in agricultural fields to check pest infestation in different crops for enhanced food production. In spite of beneficial effects, non-judicious use of pesticides imposes harmful effect on human health as their residues reach different food materials and ground water via leaching, percolation and bioaccumulation. Looking into the potential of microbial degradation of toxic compounds under natural environment, a cypermethrin-degrading Bacillus sp. was isolated from pesticide-contaminated soil of a rice field of Distt. Udham Singh Nagar, Uttarakhand, India. The bacteria degraded the compound up to 81.6 % within 15 days under standard growth conditions (temperature 32 °C pH 7 and shaking at 116 rpm) in minimal medium. Analysis of intermediate compounds of biodegraded cypermethrin revealed that the bacteria opted a new pathway for cypermethrin degradation. GC–MS analysis of biodegraded cypermethrin showed the presence of 4-propylbenzoate, 4-propylbenzaldehyde, phenol M-tert-butyl and 1-dodecanol, etc. which was not reported earlier in cypermethrin metabolism; hence a novel biodegradation pathway of cypermethrin with Bacillus sp. strain SG2 is proposed in this study.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0372-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Pyrethroid insecticides are synthetic derivatives of compounds of pyrethrin, produced by Chrysanthemum plants (Soderlund et al. 2002). These pesticides are widely used in agriculture, forestry, horticulture, public health and homes as well as for the protection of textiles and buildings (Lin et al. 2011; Zhang et al. 2011). In agriculture, these pesticides are being used for more than 40 years (Narahashi et al. 1998; Shafer et al. 2005). Extensive use of these insecticides not only results in pest resistance but also leads to several environmental issues including human health (Li et al. 2008). Cypermethrin is mainly used in cereal and ornamental plants against coleopteran (Tribolium confusum), lepidepteran and other broad group of insect larva. This pesticide is also toxic for fish. Freshwater fish (Channa punctatus) exposed to cypermethrin show reduced resistance because of low levels of red blood cells and proteins in the blood (Saxena and Saxena 2010). High levels of this chemical are neurotoxic and cause ataxia, excessive salivation, choreoatheosis, tremors and convulsions in rabbits (Khanna et al. 2002). Cypermethrin affects the voltage-dependent sodium channel and ATPase system in neuronal membranes. It binds to nuclear DNA and leads to destabilization and unwinding of DNA (Patel et al. 2006).

Looking into the facts of toxicity and persistency of this pesticide, it is urgently required to develop some strategies to eliminate or detoxify cypermethrin and its metabolites from the environment. Microbial diversity is the major factor in determining the fate of numerous xenobiotic/recalcitrant compounds in a contaminated environment. Biodegradation process involves the use of living microorganisms to detoxify or degrade the pollutants to less toxic forms. Till date, several bacterial strains such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Zhang et al. 2011), Streptomyces sp. (Lin et al. 2011), Stenotrophomonas sp. (Chen et al. 2011a) and Serratia marcescens (Cycoń et al. 2014a, b) have been reported to degrade pyrethroid pesticides. Many enzymes involved in biodegradation of cypermethrin and other pyrethroids are reported by Zhai et al. and Fan et al..In the present study, a Bacillus sp. (SG2) able to degrade cypermethrin was recovered from the pesticide-contaminated soil of a rice field of Tarai region of Uttarakhand. Biodegradation products of cypermethrin were analysed and possible biodegradation pathway of cypermethrin by Bacillus sp. (SG2) is proposed.


