
Abstract

The aim of the study was to identify new sources of substrate from agro-industrial waste for protease production using Bacillus sp., a local bacteria isolated from an agro-waste dumping site. The strain was identified as Bacillus sp. BT MASC 3 by 16S rRNA sequence followed by phylogenic analysis. Response surface methodology-based Box–Behnken design (BBD) was used to optimize the variables such as pH, incubation time, coffee pulp waste (CPW) and corncob (CC) substrate concentration. The BBD design showed a reasonable adjustment of the quadratic model with the experimental data. Statistics-based contour and 3-D plots were generated to evaluate the changes in the response surface and understand the relationship between the culture conditions and the enzyme yield. The maximum yield of protease production (920 U/mL) was achieved after 60 h of incubation with 3.0 g/L of CPW and 2.0 g/L of CC at pH 8 and temperature 37 °C in this study. The molecular mass of the purified enzyme was 46 kDa. The highest activity was obtained at 50 °C and pH 9 for the purified enzymes.



Introduction

Proteases (EC 3.4.21–24) are a cluster of enzyme which hydrolyzes proteins, that is, catabolizes proteins by hydrolysis of the peptide bonds that link amino acids together in the polypeptide chain forming the proteins. Proteases also known as peptidyl-peptide hydrolase and constitute 60–65 % of the global enzyme market (Shankar et al. 2011). Proteases are commercially important enzymes having a wide range of applications in various industrial, biotechnological, medicinal and basic research fields (Das and Prasad 2010).

Proteases are widely distributed in the microbial population, viz. bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi. Although proteases are widespread in nature, microbes serve as a preferred source of these enzymes and account for around two-thirds of commercial production worldwide. Though proteases are produced by a variety of bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Flavobacterium, Clostridium, Achromobacter, Thermo actinomyces and species belonging to Streptomyces, Bacillus sp. is the major source which secretes a variety of soluble extracellular enzymes (Selvam et al. 2016; Jellouli et al. 2008; Ellaiah et al. 2002). These strains are specific producers of extracellular proteases and can be cultivated under extreme temperature (40–60 °C) and pH (9–11) conditions to give rise to products that are, in turn, stable in a wide range of harsh environments (Eichler 2001; Han and Damodaran 1997). Currently, many economically important industrial enzymes are produced by cultivation of bacteria, such as Bacillus sp. (Hoa et al. 2000).

Solid-state fermentation (SSF) has been defined as the fermentation process which involves solid matrix and is carried out in the absence or near absence of free water; however, the substrate must possess enough moisture to support growth and metabolism of the microorganism. The solid matrix could be either the source of nutrients or simply a support impregnated by the proper nutrients that allows the development of the microorganisms (Pandey 2003). Recently, SSF has generated much interest because of lower manufacturing costs by utilizing unprocessed or moderately processed raw materials. SSF is generally a simpler process and requires less pre-processing energy than submerged fermentation. Other advantages are superior productivity, low waste water output and improved product recovery. It therefore becomes very important to determine the environmental conditions of the microorganism for maximum production (Pandey et al. 2000). However, several bacterial enzymes, such as alpha amylase, cutinase, cellulase, protease, xylanase and keratinase have been successfully produced in SSF using a wide range of bacteria (Dhillon et al. 2012).

Response surface methodology (RSM) is now being routinely used for optimization studies in several biotechnological and industrial processes (Beg et al. 2003). A statistically designed optimization study is helpful in confirming previous effects and interactions of fermentation variables and in determining the optimum values of the critical factors (He et al. 2004). The application of statistical experimental design techniques in fermentation process development can result in an improvement of product yield, reduce process variability, give closer confirmation of the output response to the experimental values and reduce overall costs. RSM can be used to evaluate the relative significance of several factors even in the presence of complex interactions (Selvam et al. 2014; Pansuriya and Singhal 2010).

The selection of an ideal agro-biotech waste for enzyme production in a solid-state fermentation process depends upon several factors, mainly related to the cost and availability of the substrate material, and thus may involve screening of several agro-industrial residues. Coffee pulp wastes (CPW) are generated during the industrial processing of coffee cherries by wet and/or dry process. These wastes are generated by coffee-producing countries (India, Brazil, Vietnam, etc.) in large amount throughout the year and are the most abundant renewable resources (Pandey et al. 2000, Roussos et al. 1995). Corncobs (CC), the central part of maize (Zea mays), are either thrown out as waste or burnt, an application with low added value, causing environmental concern. So it is an exciting research area to use corncob for chemical processing to obtain end products with added values worldwide at a very low price (Kumar et al. 2010).

The objectives of this study were as follows: identification and screening of protease-producing bacteria from agro-waste dumping site, evaluation of the potential of the agro-industrial wastes, CPW and CC as a substrates for protease production under SSF, and optimization of the physicochemical condition by BBD.


