


Introduction

With the increasing concern to valorize the waste material constantly generated, there is considerable interest in the establishment of efficient processes to obtain valuable products from residues that permit the recovery of commercially attractive products from a wide variety of residues (Soccol et al. 2011). In addition, the growing bioprocess industry depends on the progressive reduction of expensive nutrient inputs into fermentation media. The potential production and recovery of enzymes from microbial using cheap agricultural by-products such as castor press cake (Ricinus communis) improve the commercial feasibility of bioprocess technology. About 1 Mt of castor beans is harvested annually for castor oil production, with India, China, and Brazil being major producers (Mutlu and Meier 2010).

Xylan is the second most abundant polysaccharide in nature and it is the major hemicellulosic polysaccharide of wood and agricultural wastes, where it comprises up to 20–35 % dry weight. Considering the nutritional composition of castor press cake, commercial applications for such a valuable material, hitherto, considered a waste in most developing countries need to be explored and one such application could be their use as a substrate for xylanase enzyme production. Xylanase (XY) is the main enzyme which degrades linear polysaccharide β-1,4-xylan into xylose, thus breaking down hemicelluloses (Irfan et al. 2014). The design of efficient production and recovery protocols that allow the use of raw material to enzymes production is one of the key goals in the field.

High production cost and low production yields had caused the bottleneck for industrial enzyme applications, thus alternate enzyme production method using cheaper ingredient with higher yield is necessary. Several works using different substrates has been made to increase enzyme production and reduce production costs (Ang et al. 2013; Pandya and Gupta 2012). SSF is advantageous since it has greater volumetric productivities, higher product stability, low contamination risk and lower instrumental costs. Another advantage is the use of cheap solid agro-lignocellulose wastes which acts as carbon and energy source and further reduce the need of expensive nutrient medium. Aspergillus sp. was commonly classified as strong xylanase producer (Collins et al. 2005).

Aspergillus japonicus URM5620 cultivated in the SSF with castor bean meal as carbon source produces (hemi) cellulase enzymes in a shorter period with cheap and available raw material (Herculano et al. 2012). Particularly, Aspergillus sp. are considered representative model to production of commercial interest substances (Khammuang and Sarnthima 2007). The world market of xylanase is expanding speedily due to its enormous pivotal roles in various industries, particularly in the biotechnology applications, including pulp and paper, baking, animal feed, detergent, food and beverage (Ho and Lau 2014).

The downstream processing (DSP) of biomolecules is often representing a major bottleneck of the whole production process in terms of complexity and high cost, which can make up more than 70 % of the total DSP product cost (Raja et al. 2011). In this context, aqueous two-phase system (ATPS) is a promising downstream processing to sensitive biomolecules and biotechnological products (Glyk et al. 2015). PEG/salt characteristics have been exploited for several biomolecules extraction by to be primary recovery technique that integrates the concentration and partial purification of important biomolecules from their natural source in a single step (Rito-Palomares and Lyddiatt 2002).

In this context, the purpose of this study was to evaluate the production of xylanase (XY) from A. japonicus URM5620 by Solid-State Fermentation (SSF) of castor press cake (Ricinus communis) and exploits the partition and purification of xylanase in ATPS made up of PEG/citrate.


