
Abstract

l-Asparaginase (E.C. 3.5.1.1) is used as an anti-neoplastic drug in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. l-Asparaginase from Pseudomonas fluorescens was cloned and overexpressed in E. coli BL21. The Enzyme was found to be a Fusion protein-asparaginase complex which was given a lysozyme treatment and sonication, and then was purified in a Sepharose 6B column. The enzymatic properties of the recombinant enzyme were studied and the kinetic parameters were determined with kilometre of 109.99 mM and Vmax of 2.88 µM/min. Recombinant enzyme showed pH optima at 6.3 and temperature optima at 34 °C. Asp gene was successfully cloned into E. coli BL21 which produced high level of asparaginase intracellularly with 85.25 % recovery of enzyme with a specific activity of 0.94 IU/mg protein. The enzyme was a tetramer with molecular weight of approximately 141 kDa.



Introduction

l-Asparaginase enzymes (l-asparagine amidohydrolase) catalyse the hydrolysis of l-asparagine to l-aspartate and ammonia, and to a lesser extent, the hydrolysis of l-glutamine to l-glutamate (Ebrahiminezhad et al. 2011). Bacterial l-asparaginase are of two types: type 1 and type 2; type 2 showed antitumor activity because of which interest in l-asparaginase arose (Lee et al. 1989). Normal cells can synthesize l-asparaginase and because of their ability to produce this amino acid, normal cells are protected from l-asparaginase starvation unlike tumor cells which are dependent on an exogenous supply (Oza et al. 2011). Depletion of the circulating l-asparaginase by l-asparaginase enzyme results in anti-neoplastic activity. However, Escherichia coli and Erwinia sp. enzymes have been frequently used in cancer therapy (Avramis and Panosyan 2005).

l-Asparaginase from bacterial origin can cause hypersensitivity in the long term used, leading to allergic reactions and anaphylaxis. The toxicity is partially attributable to the glutaminase activity of these enzymes (Oza et al. 2011). l-Asparaginases with high asparaginase activity and negligible glutaminase activity are reported to be less troublesome during the course of antitumor therapy (Hawkins et al. 2004). The search for other asparaginase sources, with new immunological characteristics can lead to enzyme with less adverse effects. Furthermore, new studies have revealed potential application of this enzyme in prevention of acrylamide formation in fried potatoes and similar food products. Therefore, introduction of new fermentation and purification protocols for production of l-asparaginase II will be mandatory to satisfy these demands (Aghaeepoor et al. 2011). So, in this study we will be describing the cloning, expression, purification and characterization of recombinant l-asparaginase from P. fluorescens into E. coli BL21.



Discussion

In the present study, we have produced l-asparaginase by cloning the asparaginase gene from Pseudomonas sp. into E. coli, for that we started our work with isolation of DNA, primer designing for asparaginase gene, cloning into pET101 for expression and pTZ57 R/T vector for sequencing, expression of the Asparaginase gene into E. coli BL21, obtaining large quantity of enzyme using 10 L fermenter, purifying the enzyme and finally characterizing the cloned purified Asparaginase was carried out. Recombinant l-asparaginase was developed by cloning l-asparaginase from Erwinia carotovora NCYC 1526 (Er A) and expressing in E. coli. The enzyme was purified by anion-exchange chromatography and affinity chromatography on immobilized asparagine (Kotzia and Labrou 2005). Recombinant l-asparaginase has been produced by the use of molecular cloning and genetic engineering techniques. E. coli mutants resistant to substrate l-asparaginase were studied by Spring et al.. It was found that the genes encoding l-asparaginase-I and l-asparaginase-II were not sequence related.

Cloning of E. coli gene ansB encoding l-asparaginase-II, using strategy based on PCR, and sequencing the gene was discussed by Bonthron. The amino acid sequence differed from 11 positions from the data previously derived by direct amino acid sequencing. Expression of l-asparaginase-II encoded by ansB in Salmonella enterica was found to be positively regulated by a cAMP receptor protein (cRP) and anaerobiosis (Jennings and Beacham 1993). Abundance of AS mRNA was measured by RQ-PCR as reported by Irino et al., the AS mRNA level paralleled the AS enzyme activity and the AS protein level. Cellular levels of AS synchronized with cellular resistance to l-asparaginase in cell lines. Recombinant l-asparaginase from Erwinia carotovora, and purified by 1-step chromatography, was described by Krasotkina et al.. The kinetic properties showed that recombinant l-asparaginase combined the main advantages of Erwinia chrysanthemi and E. colil-asparaginase-II. l-asparaginase from Erwinia chrysanthemi 3937 (Erl-ASNase) has been expressed in E. coli BL21 (DE3) pLysS (Kotzia and Labrou 2007). The enzyme was found to be a tetramer with molecular weight of approximately 141 kDa. It had a pH optima at 6.3 and temperature optima of 34 °C with Km of 109.99 mM and Vmax of 2.88 µM/min. Its activation energies were found to be dependent on the substrate. The l-asparaginase-II functional form exists as tetramer in Pseudomonas geniculate (Kitto et al. 1979) and E. coli (Khushoo et al. 2004) with molecular mass range from 140 to 160 kDa (Aghaiypour et al. 2001, El-Naggar et al. 2014). The l-asparaginase gene of E. coli alpha-acetyl actate decarboxylate gene (ALDC) of B. brevis were amplified by PCR and cloned into a new vector transformed into S. cerevisiae. Most of the enzyme activities were secreted into the medium and the new vectors had excellent segregation stability (Zhao et al. 2002). The enzymatic and structural properties of the recombinant enzyme were investigated and the kinetic parameters [Km, Kcat] for a number of substrates were determined. The enzyme was later immobilized on epoxy-activated Sepharose CL-6B as described by Gladilina et al. who have taken SP-Sepharose (2.5 × 10 cm) equilibrated with 20 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 5.8. The immobilized enzyme retained most of its activity (60 %) and showed high stability at 4 °C. l-Asparaginase II gene isolated from thermotolerant E. coli strain, cloned in pET20b vector with 6His residues at a c-terminus downstream to the T7 promoter and pelB leader sequence, and biochemically characterized. Apart from clinical use, this enzyme can be used in fried starchy food preparation to reduce the acrylamide content, a potent carcinogen formed during the baking process by the reaction of asparaginase and sugar at hight temperature (Muharram et al. 2014). Application of microbial Lasparaginase in reducing acrylamide formation during the bread-making process, without affecting its physico-sensory properties and play an important role in reducing the formation of acrylamide. Reduction of toxic metabolites like acrylamide and HMF, i.e., Hydroxymethylfurfural (another toxic Maillard reaction compound) formed during baking, was also reduced by l-asparaginase treatment. The enzyme-treated bread was same as control bread with respect to organoleptic properties. This opens avenues for the application of microbial enzymes in obtaining safe foods (Mohan Kumar et al. 2014).

Cloning of E. coli gene ansB encoding l-asparaginase-II, using strategy based on PCR, and sequencing the gene was discussed by (Bonthron 1990). The amino acid sequence differed from 11 positions from the data previously derived by direct amino acid sequencing. Expression of l-asparaginase-II encoded by ansB in Salmonella enterica was found to be positively regulated by a cAMP receptor protein (cRP) and anaerobiosis (Jennings and Beacham 1993).
