
Abstract

Decolorisation and biodegradation efficacy of potential strains isolated from dyeing effluent collected from Tirupur region, Tamil Nadu, India were studied in remazol reactive dyes. Two potential strains Clostridium butyricum (EI05) and Clostridium acetobutylicum (EI25) identified by biochemical tests in our previous study were studied for their decolorising efficiency on various remazol reactive dyes (Remazol Blue RGB, Remazol Blue RR, Remazol Navy RGB and Remazol Orange RR). The synthetic dyes showed complete decolorization after 24–72 h by two potential strains EI05 and EI25. Clostridium acetobutylicum (EI25) was found to be the most potential strain isolated. The spectral analysis was performed by UV–Visible spectroscopy and FT-IR spectroscopy to study biodegradation. The peak disappearance in UV spectrum, peak shifts and disappearance in FTIR spectrum of treated samples indicated biodegradation. Thus Clostridium species could able to decolorize the remazol reactive dyes.



Introduction

Textile manufacturing units uses a wide range of chemicals in the dyeing process. During the dyeing process it has been reported that 10 % of the dye stuffs used remain unfixed from the fibers and are therefore present unaltered in the effluent, leading to serious environmental pollution (Pearce et al. 2003). The dyeing units are water consuming, and generate a large quantity of wastewater as effluent. Textile industry is one of the fast evolving industries in India, and their rapid growth leads to serious environmental problems especially from bleaching and dyeing units like agriculture issues, rise of heavy metals in ground water, drastic effects on flora and fauna in the surrounding area, etc. Out of various methods of textile effluent treatment for decolourisation including physicochemical methods like adsorption, filtration, coagulation and chemical flocculation, some of the methods were found to be quite effective but expensive. The volume of wastes generated during the industrial treatment process also contributes towards the selection of decolorisation methods. Bioremediation is one of the cheapest techniques, environmentally friendly alternative to other methods and produces less sludge for colour removal (Olukanni et al. 2005).

Azo dyes are of great concern because dye precursors or their biotransformation products such as aromatic amines show carcinogenic and mutagenic effects (Alves de Lima et al. 2007). Azo dyes are the largest class of dye used in the textile industry but due to their structural properties, they are not easily degradable under natural conditions and thus, are not typically removed from water by conventional wastewater treatment systems (Wamik et al. 1998). Considerable research has been done and various microorganisms has been reported to bioremediate remazol reactive dyes (Shah et al. 2013; Joe et al. 2011; Rajendran et al. 2011). Although several reports provide evidence that bacteria degrade azo compounds but very little is known about the biodegradation characteristics of these compounds. Thus the present study is designed to identify a potential strain with higher efficiency to perform biodegradation. Based on the higher usage rate of the remazol reactive dyes in the Tirupur industries for dyeing purpose, the study was designed to isolate and characterize potential biodegrading indigenous bacteria from the effluent itself and to evaluate its efficacy in terms of decolourisation of the remazol reactive dyes used in the textile industries.


