
Abstract

In this study, effect of different parameters, viz. concentration of photosensitizer (PS), pH of the bacterial cell suspension and initial cell count, on photo-inactivation of Escherichia coli and Enterococcus hirae bacteria using methylene blue (MB) and sodium anthraquinone-2-sulphonate (SAQS) was investigated employing the statistically valid full factorial design of experiments. The inactivation efficiency of E. hirae using MB ranges between 10.81 and 48.55 %, whereas in the case of E. coli it ranges between 10.41 and 46.44 %. Using SAQS, the inactivation efficiency of E. hirae was within 5.26–39.03 %, and in the case of E. coli it varied in the range 4.65–37.66 %. Statistical analysis of the photo-inactivation results in the form of analysis of variance (ANOVA) and student ‘t’ test revealed significant individual effect of these process parameters. In addition, an increase in dark incubation period with MB or SAQS resulted in enhanced photo-inactivation efficiency against both the microorganisms. Reactive oxygen species measurement and analysis of lipid peroxidation and protein carbonyl index helped in a better understanding of the photo-inactivation mechanism.



Introduction

Photosensitization is an emerging technique for efficient disinfection of drinking water and tertiary treated wastewater due to its easy implementation and cost effectiveness. It involves the combination of an active substance, i.e., a photosensitizer, light and molecular oxygen to achieve the purpose. This method is slowly taking over the existing conventional disinfection methods like chlorination, UV and ozone due to the drawbacks associated with these latter techniques. For instance, chlorination, the most widely used disinfection method suffers from the formation of disinfection by-products which have carcinogenic and mutagenic effects on mammals (Marugan et al. 2010; Pablos et al. 2011). On the other hand, ozone the most powerful disinfectant among chemical disinfectants is not feasible due to its escape from the water during the application thereby posing threat to the health of operators and the environment even at a concentration as low as 0.03 gm−3 (Acher et al. 1997), whereas UV treatment is considered costly and its exposure causes mutations.

During the last one decade a large number of photosensitizers have been tested in vitro and in vivo mainly focussing on their antimicrobial efficiency in relation to the structure of these compounds (Luksiene 2005). Photosensitizers on absorbing visible light enter into its excited state and can effect electron transfer reactions (Redox reactions) (Type I), also direct transfer of energy to ground state oxygen forms toxic singlet oxygen (Type II) which are responsible for bacterial inactivation (Wainwright and Crossley 2004). Few studies have reported that Gram positive bacteria are susceptible to any kind of dye, cationic, anionic or neutral, whereas Gram negative bacteria show resistance due to the presence of lipopolysaccharide coat that presents a physical and chemical barrier to singlet oxygen species produced outside the cells, which must enter the cell to interact with vital targets such as membrane or cytoplasmic components in order to inactivate these bacteria (Dahl et al. 1989). To render these bacteria susceptible to photo-inactivation, permeability of their outer membrane can be increased by some pre-treatment step using either chemical or biological agents (Valduga et al. 2004). On the other hand, cationic dyes are found efficient in inactivating both the kinds of bacteria (Alves et al. 2009) but are in general more efficient against Gram positive bacteria (Ergaieg and Seux 2009). Some studies have also been conducted on the effect of simple parameters like concentration of photosensitizer by Ergaieg and Seux which showed an increase in inactivation kinetics with increase in photosensitizer concentration whereas a study by Chen et al. showed alkaline pH of microbial suspension to be more effective for inactivation under visible light; however, to our knowledge, no investigation has been carried out focussing on the combined effect of these parameters which is essential for a better understanding of the process as well as for its successful scale up applications.

This work, therefore, aimed to study the combined effect of concentration of photo sensitizer, pH of the cell suspension and viable cell count employing the statistically valid full factorial design of experiments. It is expected that all the three parameters will show some significant combined effects on bacterial inactivation. Also the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and its effect on bacteria is studied. The bacterial strains used in this photo-inactivation study were E. coli and E. hirae; the photosensitizers tested were methylene blue (MB) and sodium anthraquinone-2-sulphonate (SAQS). E. coli and E. hirae are known as non-pathogenic indicator microorganisms whose presence in water indicates the possible presence of pathogenic microorganisms. E. coli is indicator of fecal contamination whereas E. hirae is indicator of contamination due to surface runoff.


