


Introduction

Rapid exploitation of fossil fuels such as coal, petroleum, etc., has invariably increased the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere to ~400 ppm (Rahaman et al. 2011). Several steps have been taken to control the CO2 emission rates caused during the pre and post-process of various man-made activities. Some of the process includes application of alkanolamine absorbents (Choi et al. 2012; Kim et al. 2013; Pires et al. 2011), desiccant absorption (Stewart and Hessami 2005), adsorption by activated carbon (Lu et al. 2008), mineral carbonate (Wang et al. 2008), zeolite (Wang et al. 2011), molecular sieve, ocean storage (Metz et al. 2005) and geological storage (Holloway 2007). Biofixation of CO2 by microalgae attracted researchers due to its affirmative behavior such as carbon neutral and biomass productivity for its various applications. However, the factors such as economic aspects, life cycle analysis, capital investment and other environment aspects have made these technological impacts slower at commercial level. Unlike other gases, CO2 has some significant limiting factors such as low mass transfer rate, high cost of CO2 capture, its transportation. Meanwhile, when the CO2(g) is passed onto the aqueous solution, it reduces the pH due to the formation of H2CO3 (free CO2) and escapes into the atmosphere thereby resulting in significant CO2 loss during algae culture (Chi et al. 2011). Furthermore, pH is the major determinant of the relative concentrations of the carbonaceous system species in water and could affect the availability of carbon for algal photosynthesis in intensive cultures and at certain situations where the supply of adequate CO2(g) is limited, inorganic carbon sources such as bicarbonate salts (NaHCO3) is best alternative to cultivate microalgae (Hsueh et al. 2009; Lam and Lee 2013; Benemann 1993). Meanwhile, it is also envisaged that mixotrophic mode of cultivating microalgae is best in terms of growth and other applications (Abreu et al. 2012; Bhatnagar et al. 2011; Cheirsilp and Torpee 2012). Based on literature, it can be established that Chlorella sp. is found to be most prominent and efficient in bio-fixing HCO3− and can grew well at mixotrophic conditions (Jeong et al. 2003; Lam et al. 2012).

Accordingly, this study has attempted to add to the current knowledge for carbon sequestration by optimizing process parameters for maximum CO2 removal using microalgae in enriched bicarbonate medium. In this context, we aim to discuss the effect of pH, sodium bicarbonate concentration and inoculum size in mixotrophic mode of cultivation for CO2 removal in microalgae. In addition, we have also monitored chlorophyll as indicator for growth and photosynthetic productivity. Also, in order to optimize the chosen factors and its interactions, central composite design (CCD) using response surface methodology has been employed. The application of response surface methodology is to maximize the effective parameters and minimize the experiments as well as to study the variables individual and interactive effects (Wang et al. 2007; Zhang et al. 2009; Khataee and Dehghan 2011).


