
Abstract

UpCoT is a pipeline tool developed by automating the series of steps involved in prediction of cis-regulatory elements. UpCoT generates orthologs for each gene in target genome using bi-directional best blast hit against the reference genomes, then identifies potential orthologous transcriptional units using intergenic distance. Finally it generates the FASTA files containing upstream sequences of orthologous transcriptional units of each gene in target genome. The inputs of UpCoT are protein sequence files (*.faa), genome sequence files (*.fna) and gene co-ordinate files (*.ptt) for target and reference genomes. The clustered-upstream DNA sequences can be used by motif prediction tool, such as MEME, Bio-prospector, Gibbs motif sampler, MDscan for prediction of conserved DNA elements. We tested the performance of UpCoT by selecting the genome of Synechocystis sp PCC 6803 as the target and 13 different cyanobacterial genomes as reference. The clustered upstream sequences generated by UpCoT of groES, ycf24 and nirA were used for cis-regulatory element prediction. The results were consistent with the experimentally identified cis-regulatory elements. Therefore, UpCoT is a reliable and automated pipeline package for prediction of orthologs, orthologous transcriptional units, and orthologous upstream sequences of a selected prokaryotic genome. UpCoT can be downloaded from http://jssplab.uohyd.ac.in/upcot/.



Introduction

With the advent of fast and next generation automated DNA sequencing technologies, a number of microbial genomes have been sequenced during the past decade and the sequence information is available in various genome databases. Identification of cis-regulatory elements and the trans-acting factors of a sequenced genome is one of the major challenges to computational biologists for building a global gene regulatory network. Phylogenetic footprinting is one of the widely accepted computational method for predicting cis-regulatory elements for a given genome in question (Hardison 2000). This method can be considered as a two step process. The first step involves, identification of orthologs in the reference genomes, for each protein of a target genome by bidirectional best hit method, prediction of transcriptional units of target and reference genomes, generation of cluster of transcriptional units (CoTs), and finally clustering of upstream DNA sequences based on the generated CoT data (Wels et al. 2006). The second step involves scanning for conserved DNA elements in the clustered-upstream DNA sequences of a given CoT. Various computational tools, such as MEME, Bioprospector, Gibbs sampler, MDScan are used for predicting conserved DNA elements in a given set of DNA sequences and can be represented in the form of consensus pattern (Bailey and Elkan 1994; Liu et al. 2001, 2002; Mrazek 2009; Neuwald et al. 1995). There are many computational tools to perform the second step of phylogenetic foot printing but, they are not available to perform the first step. Further, the first step by itself is a multi-step process and requires lengthy computational procedure. On the other hand, the number of microbial genomes being sequenced is constantly increasing and demands for the development of an automated tool. Developing such a tool would facilitate the biologists to work easily on any microbial genome for quick generation of clustered-upstream DNA sequences for the target genome in question. Keeping the above facts in view, we developed an automated integrated pipeline called, UpCoT, which identifies the orthologs for proteins of target organism (tgCoGs), generates clusters of transcription units (tgCoTs), and cluster the upstream DNA sequences of tgCoTs. The output of the UpCoT can be directly used for prediction of cis-regulatory elements using any computational tool of user’s choice.


