
Abstract

A total of 198 cereal samples (53 maize, 54 sorghum, 37 paddy and 54 wheat) were collected from 11 districts of Karnataka to understand the percent infection (PI), relative density (RD) and their frequency (Fr) caused by Fusarium spp. All samples were screened by agar plating method using MGA 2.5 agar media and incubated at 25 ± 2 °C for 3–5 days. The study revealed the association of 10 different Fusarium species known trichothecene producers such as Fusarium acuminatum, F. avenaceum, F. crookwellense, F. culmorum, F. equiseti, F. graminearum, F. nivale, F. poae, F. sambucinum and F. sporotrichioides along with non-trichothecene producers like F. anthophilum, F. oxysporaum, F. proliferatum, F. semitectum, F. solani, and F. verticillioides. All the ten isolated potential trichothecene producing Fusarium species were analyzed for their ability to produce trichothecenes by using thin layer chromatography method. The highest infection of Fusarium spp. in maize was by F. verticillioides with PI of (2.95 %), with RD of (15.16 %) and highest Fr was by F. graminearum (79.24 %) and the lowest was F. avenasium with PI of (0.13 %). For sorghum maximum PI was by F. verticillioides (3.02 %), with F. graminearum having highest RD (14.39 %) and with F. verticillioides highest Fr. (72.22 %). In paddy highest PI was by F. verticillioides (3.21 %) and the least was by F. avenaceum (0.09 %). Similarly in wheat the highest PI was by F. verticillioides (2.76 %) while lowest was by F. avenaceum (0.10 %). The highest Fr was with F. graminearum (79.62 %) while the lowest was by F. avenaceum (3.70 %) and the highest RD was by F. graminearum (22.04 %) and lowest was by F. solani (0.72 %). The manually identified Fusarium spp. were further confirmed by PCR-based detection using ITS1 and ITS4 primers followed by sequencing of the PCR amplicons. PCR studies confirmed that all the tested fungal isolates belongs to Fusarium spp. with the amplicon size of 600 bp. Sequencing and the blast data from NCBI data base confirmed the sequence similarity of 99 % to the genus Fusarium and accession numbers were obtained. Chemotyping studies showed that the isolated Fusarium species are known to produce different types of trichothecenes. The study revealed the diversity in phytopathogenic Fusarium spp. in major cereal crops growing in different agro-climatic regions of Karnataka, India.



Introduction

Cereals are mainly cultivated for food, feed and fodder. These are grown in greater quantities worldwide than any other crop to provide food energy as staple crops. The cereal grains such as maize, sorghum, wheat, rye, barely and paddy are commonly contaminated with fungi. Fungi are one of the major contaminants of food and feed grains causing biodeterioration. These grains are highly nutritious and as such they are prone to get contaminated at any point of time from harvest to storage. A wide range of fungal species including Aspergillus, Fusarium, Penicillium, Alternaria, Cleviceps, Monascum, Cephalosporium, Drechslaria, Nigrospora, Trichoderma have been reported to infect to cereal grains (Bhattacharya and Raha 2002).

The genus Fusarium is one of the most important fungal species occurring worldwide and is chiefly associated with cereal crops. Fusarium species are seed-borne, seed-transmitted, soil-borne and soil-transient plant pathogens. They cause death of seedlings, seed abortion, kernel and seedlings rots, blight, chlorosis, vascular wilt, dieback, stunt and reduction in growth in a variety of host plants. Seed-borne characteristic of Fusarium species have been well documented on various crops including cereals (Bottalico 1998), some oil seeds (Geetha and Reddy 1990), sunflower (Kaur et al. 1990), linseed (Fitt et al. 1991) and many others.

Fusarium species are known to produce more than hundred secondary metabolites such as mycotoxins in which majority of them can unfavorably affect human and animal health. These toxins inhabit naturally in cereals and other agricultural foods and feeds, either individually or in specific clusters of two or more of them. The most common and important Fusarium mycotoxins frequently occurring at biologically significant concentrations in cereals are fumonisins, moniliformins and trichothecenes (Bottalico and Perrone 2002).

The reports on Fusarium contaminations in cereals in India are scanty and first outbreak of mycotoxin contamination was reported from Kashmir in 1987. In India, deoxynivalenol (DON) has been implicated along with some other mycotoxins in rice, sorghum and wheat. Fusarium mycotoxins were also reported from cereals such as maize, sorghum, wheat, barley, rice and with some feeds and food stuffs from Hyderabad region of Andhra Pradesh and Mysore region of Karnataka (Lincy et al. 2008). Incidence and diversity in Fusarium species associated with maize and sorghum samples collected from farm yards and local markets were also reported from different districts of Karnataka (Sreenivasa et al. 2011). In the present study emphasis was bestowed to understand the diversity, relative density, extent of infection and frequency of toxigenic Fusarium species occurring on a wide range of cereals grown as crops and from stored cereal grains.


