


Introduction

RNA silencing is a common host defense mechanism in plants against many plant RNA/DNA viruses (Li et al. 2014a; Pérez-Cañamás and Hernández 2014; Valli et al. 2001). To counter the RNA silencing defense mechanism, these plant viruses encode RNA-silencing suppressors, which disturb the host RNA silencing pathway. The molecular basis for the mechanism of encoding RNA-silencing suppressors by these plant viruses is still largely unknown. P1/HC–Pro of Potyviruses, P19 of tombusviruses and 2b proteins of cucumo-viruses are some of the well-studied RNA silencing suppressors (Qu and Morris 2005) and recently new RNA silencing suppressors are being identified in a mastrevirus (Wang et al. 2014) and in a wheat dwarf virus (Liu et al. 2014). Recent studies have also pointed to the role of suppressors in modulating the function of microRNAs (Chapman et al. 2004; Dunoyer et al. 2004).

Annotation of putative members of this family is hampered by the presence of high sequence diversity existing among these plant virus-encoded RNA-silencing suppressors (Qu and Morris 2005). The sequence similarity-based search methods like BLAST (Altschul et al. 1990) and PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al. 1997) have their inherent limitations in these situations where there exists low sequence conservation. Previously in (Jagga and Gupta 2014) the shortcomings of sequence similarity-based search methods like PSI-BLAST in correctly annotating the members of this protein family are emphasized. Machine learning methods trained on mathematically represented suitable input feature vectors become a viable alternative to sequence similarity-based search methods. Previously different machine learning methods have been successfully applied to solve biological classification tasks (Kumari et al. 2015; Nath et al. 2012; Nath and Subbiah 2014). But the true performance of machine learning methods is affected by various factors such as class imbalance (Nath and Subbiah 2015a), imperfect learning due to some missing example instances and selection of inappropriate input features.

The class imbalance problem is quite common in biological datasets, where there is a huge difference in the number of instances belonging to the different classes and subclasses. These types of imbalanced datasets result in classifier bias towards the majority class and tend to produce majority class classifier (Wei and Dunbrack 2013). In most of the cases, the class of interest is the minority class and is the cause for lower sensitivity. Many methods had been proposed to deal with the class imbalance problem. Previously it has been stressed that the natural class distribution may not be optimal for training (Lee 2014; Weiss and Provost 2003) and the requirement of a balanced training set for proper learning has been pointed out by Dunbrack et al. (Wei and Dunbrack 2013). In the current work, we propose a technique to achieve better learning of both the positive and negative classes by experimenting with different resampling methods to balance the dataset with varying degree of class distributions. We have also repeated the experiments on different machine learning algorithms on imbalanced, Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) (Chawla et al. 2002) oversampled and randomly undersampled datasets to find the optimal class distribution. We used the sequence features like amino acid composition, property group composition, dipeptide counts and property group n-grams for creating the input feature vectors. Broadly, two types of approaches are used for handling the class imbalance, resampling methods which are algorithm independent and are transferable to different machine learning algorithms and internal approaches which involve altering the existing algorithms and its various parameters for adapting to imbalance class distribution. The SMOTE and random undersampling fall under resampling methods, although other sophisticated varieties of SMOTE exist (Barua et al. 2014; Han et al. 2005; Nakamura et al. 2013), but in the present study, we have limited our focus on simple undersampling and SMOTE oversampling as they are found to be useful for many classifiers (Blagus and Lusa 2013) and in many biological classification problems (Batuwita and Palade 2009; MacIsaac et al. 2006; Xiao et al. 2011).

The current method explored the possibility of improvement in prediction accuracy of the machine learning algorithms using optimal class distribution and presented in detail the behavior of the tested learning algorithms with varying degrees of resampling. From the current work, it is also proved that prediction accuracy for the plant virus-encoded RNA-silencing suppressor proteins can be improved using resampling techniques.


