
Abstract

In the present work, removal of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) by the mixed microbial consortium was evaluated in an airlift inner loop bioreactor. During the study, the effect of various reactor parameters such as hydraulic retention time (HRT), biogenetic substrate concentration, loading rate, and initial substrate concentration on the removal efficiency of 4-CP was investigated. Bioreactor showed a maximum removal rate of 16.59 mg/L/h at the optimum conditions of 24 h HRT, 400 mg/L initial 4-CP, and 0.2 g/L peptone. The optimum HRT found was 24 h after that the washout occured, and the degradation efficiency almost dropped to 50 % at 18 h HRT. Effect of peptone showed that lower concentration of peptone improves 4-CP removal efficiency of the bioreactor. Also, the mixed consortium had utilized 4-CP as a carbon source, as evidenced by the increasing biomass concentration with 4-CP at constant peptone concentration. The presence of 5-chloro 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde in the reactor infers that the mixed consortium has followed the meta-cleavage pathway for 4-CP degradation.



Introduction

With heavy industrialization and urbanization, activities polluting the environment and concomitantly sabotaging the inherent ecosystems have enormously increased. Chlorophenols have been classified as priority pollutants by the US Environmental Protection Agency (ATSDR 2015). They are primarily found in the industrial effluent from pulp and paper, leather tanning, biocide, dyes, herbicide and chlorination of drinking and waste water (Olaniran and Igbinosa 2011; Field and Sierra-Alvarez 2008; Wang et al. 2014). Chlorophenols are persistent and bio-accumulative in nature due to its physicochemical properties that cause detrimental effects on the environment. Chlorophenol compounds have been demonstrated to have mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, immunogenicity, and may cause fatalities (IARC 1986; Daniel et al. 2001). Conventional methods such as adsorption, chemical oxidation, photo-degradation and solvent extraction have limitations due to their high cost of implementation, production of toxic by-products and low energy efficiency (Herrera et al. 2008; Durruty et al. 2011). These treatments transform the toxic compounds from one phase to another. On contrary, biological treatment is a potential substitute with promising removal efficiency and complete mineralization of the chlorophenols. It is eco-friendly and energy efficient treatment with assuring future (Field and Sierra-Alvarez 2008; Olaniran and Igbinosa 2011; Basak et al. 2013, 2014; Chakraborty et al. 2013).

There are several reports on various microorganisms that have been identified for utilizing chlorophenols as a carbon and energy source such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas putida, Comamonas testosteroni, Ralstonia eutropha, Bacillus subtilis, Arthrobacter chlorophenolicus, Burkholderia sp., and Kocuria rhizophila. (El-Sayed et al. 2009; Arora and Bae 2014; Field and Sierra-Alvarez 2008; Hollender et al. 1997; Monsalvo et al. 2012; Patel and Kumar 2015, 2016). Biodegradation of chlorophenols in different bioreactor system under aerobic and anaerobic conditions has been reported. Attention has been given to study and modify the different bioreactors such as packed bedreactor, fluidized bed reactor, upflow anaerobic sludge blanket, combined anaerobic and aerobic treatment and membrane reactor to enhance the performance of wastewater treatment containing lower to higher chlorophenols (Quan et al. 2003; Galíndez-Mayer et al. 2008; Gomez-De Jesus et al. 2009; Visvanathan et al. 2005; Atuanya and Chakrabarti 2004). Aerobic biodegradation is usually preferred for lower chlorophenols such as mono and di-chlorophenol and sometimes tri-chlorophenols. While, for the treatment of higher chlorophenols such as tri, tetra, and pentachlorophenol, an anaerobic biodegradation is more effective (Poggi-Varaldo et al. 2012).

Wastewater treatment plant commonly contains the mixture of different recalcitrant synthetic organic compounds (SOC) along with biogenic substrates. The common treatment plants are not able to treat recalcitrant SOC effectively and generally passes through without complete treatment (Hu et al. 2005). The treatment of recalcitrant compounds can be improved by process optimization. These require the understanding of biomass acclimation, interaction between biogenic substrate and recalcitrant compounds, and reactor operating conditions for SOC treatment. Different factors such as hydraulic retention time, loading rate and the presence of other secondary carbon and nitrogen source have to be considered and optimized for better performance and efficiency of the bioreactors.

Airlift reactors (ALR) are simple in design with no moving parts or agitator, thus economical. In ALR, pressurized gas is used for internal mixing and aeration. It has low shear stress on microbial cells which will be an advantage for shear sensitive cells. In packed bed reactor where mass and oxygen transfer limitation and clogging of packing bed occur, these problems can be avoided in ALR (Zilouei et al. 2006; Quan et al. 2003). There are several reports on biodegradation of chlorophenols and other toxic compounds using ALR. Quan et al. reported the removal of phenol and 2,4-dichlorophenol in the airlift honeycomb-like ceramic reactor (Quan et al. 2003, 2004). They have used ceramic honeycomb-like structure placed inside the riser for immobilization of pure culture Achromobacter sp. A packed bed bioreactor equipped with the net draft tube riser (PB-ALR) for liquid circulation and oxygenation was constructed for the removal of 2,4,6-trichlorophenol (Gomez-De Jesus et al. 2009). In the present study, simple airlift bioreactor without any immobilization of microorganism was used for removal of 4-chlorophenol. The absence of agitator for mixing and any carrier for immobilization of microorganism makes the bioreactor simple with ease in operation and economical.

The present study focussed on the continuous biodegradation of 4-chlorophenol in an airlift inner loop bioreactor using the mixed microbial consortium. During the continuous operation, the effect of different parameters such as hydraulic retention time, loading rate, biogenic substrate concentration and initial substrate concentration on removal efficiency of ALR was studied. The different metabolites present in the effluent were detected to analyze the biodegradation pathway followed by the mixed consortium.


