
Abstract

Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) is one of the important palms grown both as a homestead and plantation crop in countries and most island territories of tropical regions. Different DNA-based marker systems have been utilized to assess the extent of genetic diversity in coconut. Advances in genomics research have resulted in the development of novel gene-targeted markers. In the present study, we have used a simple and novel marker system, start codon targeted polymorphism (SCoT), for its evaluation as a potential marker system in coconut. SCoT markers were utilized for assessment of genetic diversity in 23 coconut accessions (10 talls and 13 dwarfs), representing different geographical regions. Out of 25 SCoT primers screened, 15 primers were selected for this study based on their consistent amplification patterns. A total of 102 scorable bands were produced by the 15 primers, 88 % of which were polymorphic. The scored data were used to construct a similarity matrix. The similarity coefficient values ranged between 0.37 and 0.91. These coefficients were utilized to construct a dendrogram using the unweighted pair group of arithmetic means (UPGMA). The extent of genetic diversity observed based on SCoT analysis of coconut accessions was comparable to earlier findings using other marker systems. Tall and dwarf coconut accessions were clearly demarcated, and in general, coconut accessions from the same geographical region clustered together. The results indicate the potential of SCoT markers to be utilized as molecular markers to detect DNA polymorphism in coconut accessions.



Introduction

Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.), belonging to the family Arecaceae, is the only reported species under the genus Cocos. In the major growing countries in Asia, it is grown as both as a homestead as well as a plantation crop over large areas. Coconut palms are found abundantly in coastal regions of most tropical islands, significantly contributing to the sustenance of fragile island ecosystems and the livelihood of people. Considering the versatile role of coconut palms in providing food, nutrition, fibers, beverage, medicine, shelter, and wide range of handicrafts (from different parts of the palm) throughout its lifetime, the coconut palm is termed as ‘Kalpavriksha’ meaning ‘tree of heaven’ or ‘tree of life’.

Tall (‘typica’) and dwarf (‘nana’) are two main categories of coconut palms. The Talls are naturally cross-pollinating types, have more economic value, are vigorous growing, comparatively late to flowering and the fruits are with intermediate colors of brown, green, yellow, orange among individual palms. Dwarfs, in contrast, are naturally self-pollinating types with reduced growth habitat, early flowering and produce large number of medium to small, distinctly colored (green or yellow or orange or brown) fruits (Dasanayaka et al. 2009). Many efforts are ongoing in coconut-growing countries to conserve the rich natural diversity existing in coconut germplasm collections for further utilization in crop improvement programs so that it becomes a more profitable crop for small-farm holders, who constitute the vast majority of coconut growers (Batugal et al. 2005). As a first step towards this goal, assessment of genetic diversity assumes significance for germplasm conservation and their subsequent utilization.

The repertoire of markers utilized for characterizing genetic diversity in coconut can be categorized into morphological, biochemical and DNA-based. Morphological traits like seed germination time (Bourdeix et al. 1993), fruit component analysis (Harries 1978), floral biology and pollination behavior (Sangare et al. 1978; Ratnambal et al. 2003), foliar traits (N’Cho et al. 1993; Arunachalam et al. 2005) and biochemical parameters like foliar polyphenols (Jay et al. 1989), proteins (Cardena et al. 1998) and isozymes (Benoit and Ghesquiere 1984) have formed the basis of many studies in coconut diversity analysis. However, morphological and biochemical markers possess many drawbacks like being limited in number, show modest levels of polymorphism and low heritability and can be influenced by developmental stages of the plant and varied environmental factors. DNA-based markers can overcome the limitations of the above marker systems. DNA-based markers used in coconut include RAPD (Ashburner et al. 1997; Upadhyay et al. 2004; Ritto et al. 2008), RFLP (Lebrun et al. 1998), AFLP (Perera et al. 1998; Teulat et al. 2000), ISTR (Rohde et al. 1995), ISSR (Manimekalai and Nagarajan 2006a) and SSRs (Perera et al. 1999; Rivera et al. 1999; Merrow et al. 2003; Rajesh et al. 2008a, b). These markers have been applied for assessment of genetic diversity within coconut germplasm, construction of linkage maps for mapping genes or quantitative trait loci (QTL) controlling agronomically important traits (Baudouin et al. 2006; Herran et al. 2000) and trait identification (Rajesh et al. 2013).

Recent advances in genomic research has resulted in a change of preference from the use of random DNA markers to gene-targeted, functional markers and the development of novel DNA-based marker systems (Gupta and Rustgi 2004; Poczai et al. 2013). The development of functional markers has been simplified by an explosion of resources in public genomic databases (Andersen and Lubberstedt 2003). Molecular markers developed from the transcribed region of the genome have the ability to reveal polymorphism, which might be directly related to gene function (Poczai et al. 2013). Start codon targeted polymorphism (SCoT) is a simple and novel marker system first described by Collard and Mackill, which is based on the short conserved region flanking the ATG translation start codon in plant genes. The technique uses single primers designed to anneal to the flanking regions of the ATG initiation codon on both DNA strands. SCoT polymorphism marker technique has been successfully applied in rice (Collard and Mackill 2009), peanut (Xiong et al. 2010), longan (Chen et al. 2010), mango (Luo et al. 2010, 2011), citrus (Han et al. 2011), grapes (Zhang et al. 2011), potato (Gorji et al. 2011), persimmon (Deng et al. 2012), orchids (Bhattacharyya et al. 2013), Jatropa (Mulpuri et al. 2013), tritordeum (Cabo et al. 2014) and sugarcane (Que et al. 2014). In the current study, we have used SCoT markers to assess the extent of genetic diversity in a worldwide collection of coconut germplasm accessions with an aim of evaluating the efficiency of the marker system in coconut. This is the first report on the use of SCoT markers in analyzing coconut germplasm for genetic diversity and phylogenetic relationships.


