
Abstract

An in vitro protocol has been established for clonal propagation of Nothapodytes nimmoniana which is an important source of Camptothecin (CPT). Elite source was identified based on the chemical potency to accumulate the optimum level of CPT. Different types and concentrations of plant growth regulators were used to study their effect on inducing multiple shoots from the explants regenerated from embryos of N. nimmoniana. Of these, a combination of N6-benzyladenine (0.2 mg L−1) and Indole-3-butyric acid (IBA) (0.1 mg L−1) proved optimum for differentiating multiple shoots in 90.6 % of the cultures with an average of 10.24 shoots per explant obtained within 8 weeks of inoculation. Nearly, 92 % of the excised in vitro shoots rooted on half strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium containing 0.05 % activated charcoal, supplemented with 1-naphthaleneacetic acid and IBA at 0.1 mg L−1 each. The micropropagated plants were evaluated for their genetic fidelity by employing inter simple sequence repeats (ISSR) markers. Ten individuals, randomly chosen from a population of 145 regenerants, were compared with the donor plant. The regenerated plants were also evaluated for their chemical potency using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis of CPT content. The true-to-type nature of the micropropagated plants was confirmed based on their monomorphic banding profiles with that of the mother plants using ISSR markers. Besides, HPLC evaluation of the CPT content confirmed the existence of chemical uniformity among the regenerated plants and the elite mother plant.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0490-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Nothapodytes nimmoniana (Graham) Mabb. belonging to the family, Icacinaceae is a medicinally valuable tree. It is a native of Indomalaysia and Indochina. Barks of N. nimmoniana form an important source for cytotoxic quinoline alkaloid, Camptothecin (CPT) (Uma et al. 2008). CPT was first isolated by (Wall et al. 1966) from Camptotheca acuminate belonging to the family, Nyssaceae which also forms a major source for the extraction of CPT (Lorence and Nessler 2004; Sankar 2010). India’s exports in traditional healthcare products besides Indian Systems of Medicine (ISM) include a significant portion of medicinal plants and extracts. As per Export–Import (EXIM) bank report, barks of N. nimmoniana are included as major items of medicinal plants and extracts that are being exported from India. The current development on the manifestation and mortality rates, due to various forms of cancer worldwide, is extremely alarming (Jemal et al. 2008). Non-availability of enough anticancer drugs and the demand to satisfy current needs requires a sustainable source of CPT. CPT and its structural analogs have appeared as one of the most promising anticancer drugs. A number of CPT derivatives have already entered clinical trials against different forms of cancer. Topotecan and Irinotecan are already in the market as successful anticancer drugs (Arisawa et al. 1981; Hsiang et al. 1985; Aimi et al. 1989; Yamazaki et al. 2003). Besides exhibiting excellent antitumor activity, CPT inhibits viral functions by blocking the host cell topoisomerase I. Hence, it may be used to develop antiviral drugs against several DNA viruses. Pantaziz et al. reported the efficiency of CPT in inhibiting replication, transcription and assembly of double-stranded DNA of adenoviruses, papovaviruses, and herpes viruses, and the single-stranded DNA-containing parvoviruses.

Hence, the demand for CPT and its derivatives has reached US$ 2.2 billion in 2008 and expected to be more in the future (Sankar 2010). To meet this enormous demand, approximately a ton of raw material is required every year (Watase et al. 2004). Considering the potential global economic importance of this species, there is a need for large-scale production of quality planting materials for raising commercial plantations. In addition to the difficulty in the synthesis of CPT and its derivatives, the natural source becomes extinct due to the problems of drastic weather and excessive trade. Due to this fact, C. acuminata was recommended for protection by World Conservation Monitoring Centre in 2006. Likewise, N. nimmoniana is also under threat due to trade for medicine, loss of habitat and fire. Thus, it is red listed and recorded as endangered under IUCN status (Kumar and Ved 2000; Hombe et al. 2002). Conventional propagation studies in C. acuminata have not met the demand for CPT production (Sankar 2010). Various factors like fungal diseases, root rot, have limited the growth of C. acuminate and hence the total yield of CPT (Li et al. 2005). Also, the propagation of C. acuminata is limited only to sub-tropical climates and it takes a minimum of 10 years for plants to crop a stable fruit yield (Li et al. 2005; Sankar 2010). However, no reports exist on conventional propagation studies of N. nimmoniana. Thus, there is an emergency need to increase the source of CPT or to develop a protocol for mass propagation through tissue culture for large-scale production of CPT and their further elevation using elicitors and through genetic transformation. Though some work on in vitro regeneration of N. nimmoniana has been published using different explants, none of them has established protocols pertaining to the genetic and biochemical fidelity of the mature regenerants. Culture stress under in vitro conditions may cause genetic instability and somaclonal variation in the regenerants (Haisel et al. 2001). Therefore, assessment of clonal fidelity and progress in plant regeneration systems of the in vitro raised plants of N. nimmoniana will be of great significance. Application of molecular markers such as RAPD, ISSR to the micropropagated plants has proved beneficial for analyzing the genetic fidelity (Bhatia et al. 2011; Phulwaria et al. 2012; Singh et al. 2012; Kaushik et al. 2015). In addition, analyzing the CPT content of N. nimmoniana mature regenerants and the elite mother plant will further confirm the biochemical fidelity. Therefore, the present investigation was undertaken to establish an efficient protocol for rapid clonal multiplication of N. nimmoniana through shoots induced from embryos. Further, the genetic and biochemical fidelity among the micropropagated plants was established by ISSR and HPLC analysis.


