
Abstract

Protease enzyme has lot of commercial applications, so the cost-effective production of protease using sunflower oil seed waste was carried out from Oerskovia xanthineolyitca NCIM 2839. The maximum protease production was after 24 h of incubation with 2.5 % oil seed waste concentration. O. xanthineolytica was found to produce two proteases—P1 and P2. The proteases were purified using 60 % cold acetone precipitation and DEAE-cellulose ion exchange chromatography. SDS-PAGE revealed molecular weight of P1 and P2 was 36 and 24 kDa, respectively. P1 and P2 were optimally active at pH 7.0 and pH 7.5 at temperature 35 and 40 °C, respectively. Analysis of hydrolyzed product of P1 and P2 by HPLC reveals that the P1 has endoprotease and P2 has exoprotease activity. The treated soy milk with immobilized proteases showed increased shelf life and removal of off flavor.



Introduction

Proteolytic enzymes constitute one of the most important groups of commercial enzymes. These enzymes have ample utilization in industrial processes, such as the detergent industry, a major consumer of proteases, as well as food and leather industries (Kumar and Takagi 1999; Gupta et al. 2002). Proteases are ubiquitous enzymes occurring in wide diversity of species including plants, animals and microorganisms. The vast range led to numerous attempts to exploit their biotechnological applications and established proteases as one of the major groups of industrial enzymes (Rao et al. 1998). Proteases are involved in numerous biological functions, such as septum formation, sporulation, protein turnover, catabolite inactivation, protein secretion and nutrition (Van Tilburg et al. 1984; Godfrey and West 1996).

Microorganisms are the most preferred source of these enzymes in fermentation bioprocesses not only because of their fast growth rate, but also for their ability to engineer genetically to generate new enzymes with desirable abilities or simply for enzyme overproduction (Rao et al. 1998; North 1982). Microbial proteases play an important role in biotechnological processes and they account for approximately 59 % of the total enzymes used (Spinosa et al. 2000). Proteases are produced by wide range of microorganisms including bacteria, molds, and yeasts. Among bacteria, the genus Bacillus predominantly produces extracellular proteases (Godfrey and Reichelt 1985). O. xanthineolytica was potentially known for its ability to produce alkaline protease (Saeki et al. 1994) and thermotolerant chitinase (Waghmare and Ghosh 2010).

Protease production depends on many factors, such as the growth rate of the culture and the composition of the medium plays important roles (Johnvesly et al. 2002). Carbon and nitrogen sources at high concentration were considered detrimental factors in protease production (Frankena et al. 1986). Several studies had reported that proteins and peptides were necessary for effective protease production (Drucker 1972). Some work reported better protease synthesis in the presence of glucose as a carbon source (Gessesse and Gashe 1997). Other medium compounds, such as metal ions and phosphorous source, may also affect the amount of enzyme formation. Several reports have suggested that proteins from the food stuffs hydrolyzed by proteolytic enzymes lead to formation of bioactive peptides (Maestri et al. 2016; Mora et al. 2016; Moughan and Rutherfurd-Markwick 2013). In this study, attempt has been made for the economic production of protease from Oerskovia xanthineolytica NCIM 2839 using oil industry solid waste and immobilized protease used for the improvement of soymilk quality such as flavor and shelf life.


