
Abstract

Conjugated Linoleic Acid (CLA), a fatty acid with high nutraceutical value is produced in rumen by resident bacterial species, especially Butyrivibrio spp. The present study was undertaken to examine the diversity of indigenous Butyrivibrio spp. from rumen liquor of Indian ruminants. The isolates were screened for their CLA production capability at different level of linoleic acid (LA) (0, 200, 400, 600, 800 μg/ml) at different time intervals (0, 2, 4, 6, 12, and 24 h). A total of more than 300 anaerobic cultures were isolated and 31 of them were identified as Butyrivibrio spp. based on morphological, biochemical and molecular characterization. Further, molecular characterization revealed that a large portion (67.7 %) of isolated Butyrivibrio belonged to Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens (B. fibrisolvens) species which is considered to be the most active bacteria amongst the rumen bacteria populace in terms of CLA production. Bacterial isolate VIII (strain 4a) showed highest CLA production ability (140.77 μg/ml) when incubated at 200 μg/ml LA for 2 h, which is 240 % higher than the isolate XXVII, Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus (B. proteoclasticus) showing lowest CLA production (57.28 μg/ml) amongst the screened isolates. It was evident from the observations recorded during the course of experiments that CLA production ability is strain specific and thus did not follow a single pattern. CLA production also varied with time of incubation and concentration of free linoleic acid supplemented in the growth medium. The results of these findings put forward a strain that is high CLA producer and can be further exploited as an additive for enhancing meat and milk quality in ruminants.



Introduction

CLA is a mixture of positional and geometric isomers of linoleic acid (cis-9, cis-12, C18:2) with two conjugated double bonds at various carbon positions in the fatty acid chain. It is formed as an intermediate during the biohydrogenation of LA by linoleic acid isomerase from the rumen bacteria (Li et al. 2012).

The increased interest in its anti-cancerous, anti-atherogenic, immune-modulatory properties (Hino et al. 2012; Chinnadurai et al. 2013; Dilzer et al. 2015) has provided an impetus to the research, in past decade, leading to better understanding of underlying mechanisms and its natural incorporation in the food products pertaining to its high nutraceutical value. It has now been understood that rumen can be a site of therapeutic interference for enhancement of natural CLA content and rumen microorganisms are major influential factors in the rumen fatty acid biohydrogenation process and ultimately formation of CLA.

Rumen bacteria responsible for biohydrogenation of fatty acids are categorized into two distinct groups (Type A and B), depending on their ability to hydrogenate both the dienoic and the monoenoic acids or only the monoenoic acid. Type A bacteria convert the LA to CLA, i.e. Butyrivibrio, Micrococcus, Ruminococcus, Lactobacillus and dominated by B. fibrisolvens which has higher CLA-producing capacity than other ruminal bacteria. Type B bacteria are producing stearate from PUFA in rumen, i.e. Fusocillus, B. proteoclasticus (Ha et al. 1989).

Several species of CLA-producing bacteria have been isolated from the rumen, intestine and starter cultures used in the dairy industry (Kepler et al. 1966; Willems et al. 1986; Griinari and Bauman 1999; Lin et al. 1999; Kritchevsky 2000; Coakley et al. 2003; Kim 2003; Rosberg-Cody et al. 2004). According to these reports, the prevalent ruminal bacterium B. fibrisolvens isomerizes LA to CLA faster than any other bacterial species. To date most studies have analysed and explained the effects of B. fibrisolvens on meat and milk products, several others have demonstrated its healthy effects in mice (Ohkawara et al. 2006; Hino et al. 2012; Chinnadurai et al. 2013). In this study we have extended the knowledge of Butyrivibrio diversity, particularly in rumen of ruminant population of Indian origin, by analysing the 16SrRNA sequencing data. The strains of Butyrivibrio spp were found to exhibit large diversity and B. fibrisolvens was present in large number amongst other species (67.7 %).

Apart from the diversity study we have also demonstrated that ability of a rumen microbe to use LA as a precursor for CLA production is highly strain specific. This also suggests that using feed with high LA content as prebiotic and a high CLA-producing bacterium along with it can have a synergistic effect resulting in ruminant food product with high nutraceutical content.


