
Abstract

The use of polymorphic markers like SNPs promises to provide comprehensive tool for analysing genome and identifying genomic regions that contribute to cancer phenotype. Horn cancer is the most common cancer among Bos indicus animals. Increased expression of some genes due to polymorphisms increases risk of HC incidence. We successfully amplified 91 SNPs located in 69 genes in 52 samples, each of HC and HN. Equimolar concentration of amplicons from 69 PCR products of each sample was pooled and subjected to sequencing using Ion Torrent PGM. Data obtained were analysed using DNASTAR software package and case control analysis using SAS software. We found SNP present in BPIFA1 gene of B. indicus shows association with event of HC which reflects its potential to be a genetic marker. Bioinformatic analysis to detect structural and functional impact nsSNP of BPIFA1 added another layer of confirmation to our result. We successfully identified SNP associated with HC as well as demonstrated efficient approach for limited number of SNP discovery and validation in targeted genomics regions in large number of samples combining PCR amplification and Ion Torrent PGM sequencing which suits small-scale laboratories with limited budget.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0351-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Recent advances in sequencing technologies give unrivalled opportunities to explore individual genomic landscapes and identify mutations related to cancer, a complex set of diseases characterised by both environmental and genetic contributions. The use of polymorphic markers like single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) assures to provide a comprehensive tool for analysing the mammalian genome with precise identification of genomic loci contributing to the cancer phenotype. Advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have allowed the characterisation of SNPs at genome-wide level with high densities that were previously thought to be unachievable. Thus, NGS paved the way for the fundamental understanding of mutated genes in cancer cells, affected pathways and how these data enrich our knowledge of cancer biology (Mardis and Wilson 2009).

Squamous cell carcinoma is a sporadic and highly malignant neoplasm that arises from the malpighian layer of epidermis, frequently associated with solar dermatosis. It is also known as horn cancer (HC) that involves neoplastic growth derived from proliferating horn core epithelium of predominantly mid-aged zebu bullocks affecting 1 % of cattle population (Naik et al. 1969) and causing huge economic losses due to mortality as well as reduced draft capacity as a result of prolonged morbidity. Castrated male animals, i.e. bullocks make up 95 % of the affected animals and cows 5 %, whereas it is very rare in bulls, buffaloes, sheep and goats (Chattopadhyay et al. 1982; Damodaran et al. 1979; Gupta et al. 1980; Kulkarni 1953). The incidences of HC were found to be highest in Kankrej breed of zebu cattle followed by Gir and Malvi (Joshi et al. 2009). Poorly defined genetic landscapes, absence of specific genetic markers and lack of complete understanding of genetic basis of etiopathology pose major challenges in early diagnosis. The RNA-seq based gene expression analysis indicates altered expression of numerous genes as well as multiple pathway dysfunction in HC and significant similarity in expression profiling with human lung SCC (Koringa et al. 2013a).

The large complex genome of Bos indicus has hindered the development of genetic resources despite the economic importance of the species. Combined efforts of high-throughput sequencing and sophisticated bioinformatics analysis will result in identifying distinctive ‘molecular portraits’ that can be correlated with clinical behaviour in cancer may also be categorised as a ‘tumour marker’ for predicting prognosis of cancer (Harris et al. 2007). A total of 26,539,698 SNPs are distributed across 4,803,648 genes in dbSNP of B. taurus genome build 6.1. The genome assembly of B. indicus is not yet available; whole genome sequencing (WGS) of B. indicus is currently ongoing at our research centre. The gene expression profiling in HC of B. indicus animals was explored with identification of SNPs in aberrantly expressed genes in our primary RNA-seq based approach.

Identification of SNPs in cancer genome using exon capture followed by sequencing (Varela et al. 2011; Xiong et al. 2012) and complete genome sequencing were proven to be costly but valuable methods for the discovery of the genetic causes of rare and complex diseases (Gonzaga-Jauregui et al. 2012; Ng et al. 2010). The said methods suit well the large-scale experiments involving studies of thousands of genes at a time. As an alternative to the above approaches, we tested a newer approach of targeted amplification of complete genomic regions followed by next-generation sequencing of genes showing aberrant expression in our previous study for identifying (Koringa et al. 2013b) and correlating with HC. In addition, comparative SNP profiling of B. taurus and B. indicus was also done to enrich the dbSNP of Indian zebu cattle.



Discussion

In this research paper, we tested identification and validation of targeted genomic amplification of predetermined genomic locus using NGS in a marginally small number of samples using 316 chip of Ion Torrent PGM sequencing system. We performed amplification of 75 targeted regions in 96-well PCR plates at a time following common PCR protocol. We succeeded in amplifying 69 genes. As a result of utmost care taken in quantitation of each library before pooling, we could sequence all 91 SNPs located in 69 genes with at least 20 reads covering each SNP. Our analysis suggested that the amplification of a predetermined genomic regions followed by the next-generation sequencing is an effective way to identify SNPs without going for complete sequencing of the whole genome. This approach will be effective in quickly assessing the spectrum of SNPs in important genes or genomic regions affecting HC. Similar observations were also reported in other studies related to SNP discoveries in variety of diseases (Cheng et al. 2010; Elliott et al. 2012; Junemann et al. 2012; Lopez-Doriga et al. 2014). Our approach not only identify SNPs in exons, but also SNPs located in introns and up- and downstream regions, which have been recognised more important as playing important roles in gene regulation and diseases (Jaillon et al. 2008). Despite all care taken for equimolar pooling of libraries before emulsion PCR, sample-wise data output varies significantly from 8.3 to 172 MB with an average of 69 MB; the possible reason could be preferential amplification during emulsion PCR towards genomic regions having different nucleotide sequence composition as reported in many groups of scientists across various experiments (Acinas et al. 2005; Becker et al. 2000; Kanagawa 2003; McInroy et al. 2014).

We found nine commonly found ‘reference genotype’ in both conditions that represent contrasting results to that of our previous study. Since our previous identification of SNP was based on one sample in contrast to present validation on 104 samples with sequencing depth of 20 for each SNP, the result of this research is justified. We found 56 B. indicus specific SNPs showing ‘homozygous variant genotype’ in both conditions. So far only 42 validated SNPs have been reported at dbSNP build 130 Genome build 4.1 of ‘B. indicus × B. taurus’ at GenBank http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/snp_summary.cgi?build_id=130). SNPs validated in this study will significantly enrich database and will serve as resource for array-based genome-wide association studies. India adopted strategies to introduce exotic inheritance of B. taurus draft purpose cattle breeds to increase overall productivity resulted into some exotic inheritance is very well represented by 17.5 % SNPs commonly showing ‘heterozygous reference’ in both conditions as the sampling for present study was based on phenotypic characters only.

A case control analysis of 52 cases of HC versus 52 samples of HN using JMP Genomics 6.1 of SAS identified a single SNP present in BPIFA1 gene on chromosome number 13 of B. indicus at position 63251805 significantly associated with HC. The gene BPIFA1 is also known as PLUNC (Palate, Lung and Nasal Epithelium Carcinoma associated). It is specifically expressed in upper airways and nasopharyngeal regions of mammals (Iwao et al. 2001). The exact biological function of this gene is not known; however, it has been suggested to be involved in inflammatory responses to irritants in the upper airways (Liu et al. 2013). It was suggested as a potential molecular marker for detection of micrometastasis in non-small-cell lung cancer by many groups of researchers (Benedikova et al. 2012; Iwao et al. 2001; Li et al. 2014; Yew et al. 2012). PLUNC1 regulates cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis through miR-141, which in turn regulates PTEN and p27 expression. This signalling axis is negatively regulated by the EBV-coded gene LMP1. Thus, SPLUNC1 suppresses tumour formation and its inhibition by LMP1 provides a route for tumorigenesis (Chen et al. 2013).

The SNP identified in our study has already been reported as dBSNP ID rs136870681 in whole genome assembly of B. taurus cattle. BPI fold containing family A, member 1 (BPIFA1) gene is 7696 bp long gene with six exons in it [NCBI Reference Sequence: AC_000170.1; region from base 63247184 to 63254779]. A missense mutation at 63251805 position results in allele change TTC ⇒ TCC at 189 position amino acid substitution that resulted in F (Phe) ⇒ S (Ser) residual change (Zimin et al. 2009). In the mutation database 4 nsSNPs for the BPIFA1 gene has already been identified, but information regarding association study is not available. The PROVEAN classified this substitution mutation as a neutral in functional impact but, analysis based on I-Mutant 2.0 indicates that mutant protein has decreased stability at pH 7. Analysis of SCA resulted in low accessible surface area thought to be because of disrupt in ligand-binding site or protein binding sites that will affect protein function and alter the protein stability or folding rate (Ng and Henikoff 2006).
