
Abstract

In this study, 51 fungal strains were isolated from decaying wood samples collected from forests located in the Northwest of Tunisia in the vicinity of Bousalem, Ain Draham and Kef. Phylogenetic analysis based on the sequences of the internal transcribed spacers of the ribosomal DNA showed a high diversity among the 51 fungal isolates collection. Representatives of 25 genera and 29 species were identified, most of which were members of one of the following phyla (Ascomycota, Basidiomycota and Zygomycota). In addition to the phylogenetic diversity, a high diversity of secreted enzyme profiles was also detected among the fungal isolates. All fungal strains produced at least one of the following enzymes: laccase, cellulase, protease and/or lipase.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0356-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Wood is the most abundant biopolymer in nature and is made up mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. The lignin polymer is highly recalcitrant toward chemical and biological degradation due to its molecular architecture, where different non-phenolic phenylpropanoid units forming a complex three-dimensional network, are interconnected by a variety of ether and carbon–carbon bonds. Its biodegradation is a key step for carbon recycling in terrestrial ecosystems.

A number of. microorganisms including bacteria and filamentous fungi are able to degrade lignocellulosic components to various extents (Eriksson et al. 1990; Ruiz-Dueñas and Martínez 2009). Fungi participating in plant cell wall deconstruction include white rot, brown rot and leaf litter fungi (Cho et al. 2009).

The white rot fungi are the most studied because they are the unique organisms able to mineralize cell wall components with high lignin content, producing a bleached aspect of decayed wood in nature (Taylor 1995; Sigoillot et al. 2012). This ability is related to their production of a nonspecific system, including several extracellular enzymes, low molecular weight metabolites and activated oxygen species (Schoemarker 1990; Dashtban et al. 2010; Choi et al. 2012). It is worth mentioning that this system is also involved in the degradation of aromatic recalcitrant compounds causing environmental problems (Schoemarker et al. 1991; Reddy 1995).

In this sense, ligninolytic enzymes have been involved in the degradation of xenobiotic and recalcitrant aromatic compounds, industrial dyes (Khlifi et al. 2009; Daâssi et al. 2012), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) (Lee et al. 2013), pesticides (Xiao et al. 2011), dioxins (Sato et al. 2002), chlorophenols (Li et al. 2011), explosives (Cheong et al. 2006) and kraft pulp bleaching (Moldes et al. 2010).

The enzymes involved in lignin degradation include laccases, different types of peroxidases and oxidases producing H2O2 (Shimada and Higuchi 1991, Martínez et al. 2009). The most widely studied ligninolytic enzymes are, lignin peroxidase (LiP), Mn-dependent peroxidase (MnP) and laccase (Lac) (Thurston 1994; Orth and Tien 1995) in contrast to the other high redox potential peroxidases, such as versatile peroxidase (VP) and dye decolorizing peroxidase (DyP, EC 1.11.1.19) (Martínez et al. 2009; Sugano 2009). The complete conversion of lignocellulose requires the hydrolysis of structural cell wall polysaccharides by carbohydrate-acting enzymes, such as cellulases and hemicellulases (Hatakka and Hammel 2010). In addition other complementary enzymes, such as esterases/lipases or proteases, could complement the enzymatic cocktails to completely transform wood biomass into product of biotechnological interest, such as animal feed, chemical products and/or biofuel (Leonowicz et al. 1999; Barriuso et al. 2013; Dashtban et al. 2010).

Although basidiomycetes have been the most commonly studied fungi as principal organisms involved in lignin biodegradation, Ascomycetes are also able to degrade cellulose and hemicellulose despite their limitation in lignin conversion (Martínez et al. 2005). Among these ascomycetes some pathogenic fungi, such as Fusarium solani, are able to degrade lignin and secrete laccases and lignin peroxidases (Obruca et al. 2012).

It is estimated that there are approximately 1.5 million fungal species in the world, of which only approximately 4.6 % are described (Hawksworth, 2001). Given the wide diversity of the ligninolytic enzymes, the lignocellulosic degrading enzyme complex to which they belong and their dependence on the species and/or on the culture conditions (Hatakka, 1994; Peláez et al. 1995), the isolation and study of new ligninolytic fungi and their enzymes still receive huge interest for their putative biotechnological applications.

In this study, within the framework of a screening program of lignin microorganism degraders, we aimed to assess the fungal diversity of wood degraders in Tunisian forests. 51 new fungal species were isolated, identified, phylogenetically grouped and analyzed for their enzymes involved in biomass transformation (laccase, lipase, cellulase and protease activities).


