


Introduction

In the current scenario, the major concerns are towards the diminishing of fossil fuels which have forced the energy industries and researchers to develop alternatives to the existing fuels (Bentsen and Felby 2012). One of the attractive sustainable substitutes is the microbial production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic wastes as it is cost-effective and renewable (Ren et al. 2009). Plant biomass constitute of cellulose which is the major organic polysaccharide found in the biosphere (Bhat and Bhat 1997) and is renewable. Biodegradation of plant based biomass requires cellulose and hemicellulose saccharifying enzymes. For example, cellulases participate in saccharification of biomass for bioethanol production (Dhillon et al. 2011), by mainly acting on β-1,4-glycosidic bonds of cellulose. Cellulolytic enzymes have been classified as: endoglucanase (endo-1,4-d-glucanase, EG), cellobiohydrolase (exo-1,4-d-glucanase, CBH) and glucosidase (1,4-d-glucosidase, BG) (Saha 2004), which have been shown to act synergistically for effective degradation (Lynd et al. 2002) whereas xylanases (1,4-β-d-xylanohydrolase) hydrolyze xylan, a major component of hemicellulose (Zhang et al. 2011). The fungal endoglucanases finds its applications in biomass bioconversions, pulp and paper, textile, detergents, starch processing, grain alcohol fermentation, brewery, wine making, extraction of fruit and vegetable juices (Karmakar and Ray 2011; Kuhad et al. 2011). These applications certainly require endoglucanases with industrial attributes like thermostability, stability at varying pH, substrate specificities (Bhat 2000), solvent tolerant, detergent compatibility, chemical stability, etc. Solid state fermentation (SSF) for cellulase production is an advantageous process as it reduces the capital investment with easy operating conditions (Pandey et al. 1999). Cellulose saccharification can be carried out by separate hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF) process with an ease of optimizing the enzymatic hydrolysis conditions (Zhu et al. 2012) for ethanol production. Ethanol quantification can be achieved by employing methods like GC–MS. Desirable for better specificity, few mass spectrometric (MS) methods for ethanol analysis have been reported (Tiscione et al. 2011). Insights of molecular level changes and functional groups in the lignocellulosic material at various fermentation steps could be studied by employing FTIR (Adapa et al. 2011; Sim et al. 2012), morphological changes by SEM and substrate elemental analysis by higher throughput techniques like SEM equipped with EDX technique.

Keeping in view the industrial applications of the endo β-1,4-d-glucanase, this study was carried out to purify and characterize a novel endo β-1,4-d-glucanase from Trichoderma harzianum strain HZN11. Enzymatic hydrolysis and ethanol fermentation was successfully achieved. Further, sweet sorghum bagasse was molecularly characterized with techniques like FTIR, SEM and SEM/EDX.


