
Abstract

The present study was aimed to isolate novel bioactive compounds from actinomycetes species isolated from mangrove habitats. With this connection, Pseudonocardia endophytica (VUK-10) was isolated using dilution plate technique and was examined for its secondary metabolite profiling. After successive purification and spectroscopic characterization viz., FTIR, mass, NMR, DEPT, HMQC, HMBC, and COSY spectroscopy, two compounds were identified including a semi synthetic derivative N-(4-aminocyclooctyl)-3, 5-dinitrobenzamide, obtained from the precursor of novel natural product cyclooctane-1,4-diamine, along with a known compound 3-((1H-indol-6-yl) methyl) hexahydropyrrolo [1, 2-a] pyrazine-1, 4-dione. Anti cancer activities of the characterized compounds against in vitro cancerous cell line models, MDA-MB-231, OAW-42, HeLa, and MCF-7 reveal that HELA cells are most susceptible (IC50-10 nM compound 1 and 2) followed by other studied cells. On the other hand, antibacterial and antifungal activities of the studied compounds against tested pathogens revealed that there is a significant antimicrobial activity with all the tested bacterial and fungal species. Moreover, compound 1 showed the lowest MIC values against Streptococcus mutans as 4  and 16 µg/ml for Candida albicans. In conclusion, the identified novel chemical compounds in the present study may have a potential application in anticancer therapy as well as to mitigate the bacterial and fungal pathogens thus to control the infectious diseases.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0472-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The continuous search for the antimicrobial agents with affording protection, effective against clinical infections caused by Gram-negative bacteria, fungi, virus, and mycobacteira is at great demand. For many years, the focus on bioprospecting of novel secondary metabolites was from the terrestial environment but the marine habitat has been unlocked (Solanki et al. 2008). This is be cause of the imagination of scientists, that very few micro-organisms were present in the sea water due to extreme salinity which deemed to be a habitat unfavourable for many microbes dwelling. The belief of the scientist has been cornered due to the hypothesis of the researchers stating both the marine and terrestrial ecosystem conditions are extremely varied. The micro-organism dwelling in the marine environment should have possessed characteristics different from those of the terrestrial ecosystem that have a tendency to produce rare varied bioactive compounds (Davies et al. 2015). Extreme habitats have an immense potential as a source for novel microbes with taxonomic significance. These microbes serve as prolific producers of several important biomolecules due to their evolution and their metabolic adaptation in terms of the biochemical products such as enzymes and antibiotics (Satyanarayana et al. 2005). Marine microbes are virtually unlimited source of novel therapeutic compounds with medical application. Actinomycetes belong to the domain prokaryotes which inhabit diverse ecological niches and undoubtedly signifies their existence as psychrophilic, thermophilic, alkaliphilic, acidophilic, and halophilic (Goodfellow and Fiedler 2010). Actinom ycetes of the extremophilic category are a promising source for anti-microbial and cytotoxic compounds due to their unusual and diverse community and unexplored metabolic pathways existing in various genera at species variants (Shuvankar et al. 2015).

Microbial products being the natural source play a key role in the discovery and understanding of cellular pathways which are very vital in the drug discovery process. Many species belonging to the genera Streptomyces constitute 50 % of the soil microbial population and 75 % of molecules with antibiotic activity are produced by this genus (Piret and Demain 1988). Actinomycetes have been studied as potential producers of secondary metabolites with assorted chemical structures and biological properties. This led to search for useful products from rare genera of actinomycetes from unusual environments (Ellaiah et al. 2004; Khanna et al. 2011). The motive behind such strategies is to intensify the discovery of potential chemical moieties. Exploring new sources and introduction of effective antibiotics to fight the challenging and dreaded diseases is essential. Thus, searching for new actinomycetes from unexplored habitats constitute an essential component in natural product-based drug discovery (Clardy et al. 2006).

Antibiotics are one of our most important tools in fighting microbial infections and are greatly beneficial and improve the health profile of human life (Nayan and Shukla 2001). The antibiotic resistance growth coupled with apparent fall in the potential antibiotic number over the last two decades has raised concern about the future treatment of harmful and life threatening microbial infections. In addition, antibiotic resistance hindered the treatment and eradication of certain infecting pathogens affecting the immune system and the rise of different types of cancer has been greatly influencing the need to investigate new bioactive metabolites (Wise 2008; Talbot et al. 2006; Demain and Sanchez 2009).

Few reports have highlighted that the extreme habitats such as hot springs, deserts, marine ecosystem, and deep oceanic floors need to be explored for novel bioactive compounds (Ballav et al. 2012). The organisms isolated from such habitats serve as rich bioresource for the discovery of novel genera with novel chemical entities of biotechnological importance. Some of the natural compounds such as siderophores, indole acetic acid (Sadhegi et al. 2012) antagonistic metabolites, and antimicrobial metabolites (Dhanasekaran et al. 2005; Lakshmipathy and Kannabiran 2009) against clinical pathogens are obtained from the saline soil actinomycetes of the Indian subcontinent.

Mangroves are a specific woody plant community of intertidal coasts in the tropical and semitropical zones. They are considered as highly prolific and specific ecosystems and habitat to trap unexplored microbial diversity (Balagurunathan et al. 2010). There are ample evidences that the mangroves contain high populations of new and useful actinomycetes which become encouraging sources for bioactive metabolites (Kui et al. 2009). Recently, there has been elated interest in identification and biological evaluation of bioactive natural products from the rare actinomycetes (Hayakawa 2008). An intense literature survey reveals the bioactive metabolite profile of genus Pseudonocardia, covering antibacterial, antifungal, enzyme inhibitors, neuro protective, anti-Helicobacter pylori and cytotoxic compounds (Omura et al. 1979; Dekker et al. 1998; Maskey et al. 2003; Oh et al. 2009; Li et al. 2011; Gavin et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2012). As a part of our ongoing project of isolation of bioactive secondary metabolites from actinomycetes, we identified the strain Pseudonocardia endophytica VUK-10 isolated from Nizampatnam mangrove ecosystem (Ushakiranmayi et al. 2012) has been producing antimicrobial and cytotoxic active compounds. The present paper describes the extraction, purification, structural elucidation, and biological evaluation of the active metabolites produced by the supra said strain.



Discussion

Recent research efforts have focused on the exploration of under explored habitats to discover novel bioactive secondary metabolites from the autochthonous microbiota (Omar et al. 2015). Natural products are the important assuring source for novel bioactive molecules especially antimicrobial compounds over combinatorial chemistry and fragment based drug designing that devote very little to corner the spread of the antibiotic resistant pathogens (Shuvankar et al. 2015). Antibiotics are the group of important bioactive compounds for the treatment of infectious diseases. Natural products remain as most prominent source for the exploration of uncommon innovative bioactive molecules especially antimicrobial compounds due to the fact that the spread of the antibiotic resistant pathogens cannot be counteracted and reversed since combinatorial chemistry and fragment-based drug designing contribute very little (Goodfellow and Fiedler 2010; Mikhail et al. 2015). Among the different niches, mangrove forests are exclusively rare niches which harbor a diverse range of microbes (Farshid and Faranak 2015). Actinomycetes are the predominant members of marine microbial communities and are also known to adapt to harsh environmental conditions (Augustine et al. 2012).

In the present screening programme undertaken for exploration of the novel bioactive secondary metabolites from Nizampatnam mangrove ecosystem, a potent isolate with high antimicrobial and cytotoxic activities identified as Pseudonocardia endophytica VUK-10 was isolated. A semisynthetic derivative (N-(4-aminocyclooctyl)-3, 5-dinitrobenzamide) along with a known compound (3-(1H-indol-6-yl) methyl) hexahydropyrrolo [1, 2-a] pyrazine-1, 4-dione) was isolated from the fermentation broth of the strain grown on glucose-soy peptone broth. The precursor of the semisynthetic compound 1 could be cyclooctane-1, 4-diamine (Fig. 7). A quick SciFinder search reveals that this is an unknown compound that has not been identified as a metabolite from any microorganisms.Fig. 7Compound 3 (not been isolated purely) is the precursor of semi synthetic compound 1

Fig. 7

Compound 3 (not been isolated purely) is the precursor of semi synthetic compound 1

The compound 2, a non-ribosomal peptide is indistinguishable with cyclo (tryptophanyl prolyl), a cyclic dipeptide between the amino acids tryptophan and proline. Cyclic dipeptides (CDPs) are commonly biosynthesized from amino acids by different organisms, including mammals, and are considered to be secondary functional metabolites or side products of terminal peptide cleavage (Maristela and Ivone 2007). CDPs are more than simple curiosities and are well known for their economically beneficial biological activities (Prasad 1955). The therapeutic potential of these compounds reflects their antibiotic, antiviral, and antitumor properties and various cyclic dipeptides are detectable in protein and polypeptide hydrolysates as well as in cultures of yeasts, lichens, and molds (Otteinheijm et al. 1976; Graz et al. 1999; Katrin et al. 2002). The isolation of compound 2 was previously reported as a natural product from two Penicillium strains (Paterson et al. 1990).

Our results showed that compound 1 has a good potential inhibitor against Streptococcus mutans (responsible for human dental decay), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (causes pneumonia, bacteremia, and endocarditis), Candida albicans (causes oral thrush and vaginal infection) and Aspergillus niger (causes black mold on grapes, onions, and peanuts). Compound 2 showed to have antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus (causes impetigo, carbuncles, and abscesses), Escherichia coli (causes cholecystitis, bacteremia, cholangitis, and urinary tract infection), Xanthomonas malvacearum (causes angular leaf spot of cotton) and Epidermophyton floccosum (causes tinea pedis, tinea cruris, and tinea corporis).

The potential of compounds 1 and 2 was investigated to inhibit cancer cell growth in MDA-MB-231, HeLa, OAW-42, and MCF-7 cell lines. Our results showed that compounds 1 and 2 displayed similar level of significant cytotoxicity with variation in percentage of cell line inhibition against MDA-MB-231, HeLa, OAW-42, and MCF-7 cell lines. To the best of our knowledge, anti cancer activity of compounds 1 and 2 against the above said cell lines are reported here for the first time. The data reported in this paper clearly indicate that our compounds exhibit significant anti cancer activities at nanomolar concentrations. Contemporary identification of primary and secondary metabolites from taxonomically exclusive population of actinomycetes disclosed that these microbes could add a new element to microbial natural product research (Jicheng et al. 2015).
