
Abstract

Statistical experimental designs were applied to optimize the fermentation medium for exopolysaccharide (EPS) production. Plackett–Burman design was applied to identify the significance of seven medium variables, in which sweet potato and yeast extract were found to be the significant variables for EPS production. Central composite design was applied to evaluate the optimum condition of the selected variables. Maximum EPS production of 9.3 g/L was obtained with the predicted optimal level of sweet potato 10 %, yeast extract 0.75 %, 5.5 pH, and time 100 h. The determined (R2) value was 0.97, indicating a good fitted model for EPS production. Results of this study showed that sweet potato can be utilized as a low-cost effective substrate for pullulan production in submerged fermentation.



Introduction

Biopolymers produced by a wide variety of microorganisms which are generally water soluble gums having novel and unique physical properties. Polysaccharides have found a wide range of applications in the food, pharmaceutical, and other industries. Typical industrial uses of EPS are as food coatings and packaging material due to its good film-forming properties similar to those of polyvinyl alcohol. Pullulan is used as an adhesive in the form of paste with water, as a construction material with fibers similar in strength and elasticity to those in nylon and as a bulking agent and stabilizer for tablets in the pharmaceutical industry (Deshpande et al. 1992). Many researchers have optimized the production conditions for exopolysaccharide (EPS) in submerged culture by Fomes fomentarius (Chen et al. 2008), Tremella fuciformis (Cho et al. 2006), Pholiota squarrosa (Wang et al. 2004), Agrocybe cylindracea (Kim et al. 2005), Collybia maculate (Lim et al. 2004), Cordyceps jiangxiensis (Xiao et al. 2004), Cordyceps militaris (Kim et al. 2003), Aureobasidium pullulans (Moubasher and Wahsh 2014), and Tremella mesenterica (De Baets et al. 2002).

For a wide application, the cost of medium components is one of the main factors determining the economics of a process. In the literature, several agro-based products were utilized as low-cost substrate in the medium for economic production of pullulan through fermentation process (Srikanth et al. 2014; Sharmila et al. 2013a; Goksungur et al. 2011; Wu et al. 2009). In this study, sweet potato was used as an alternative low-cost carbon source for pullulan production.

Statistical experimental designs such as Plackett–Burman (BP) design and response surface methodology (RSM) are successfully employed to screen and optimize the process parameters in bioprocess field (Sharmila et al. 2013b). RSM, an experimental strategy for seeking the optimum conditions for a multivariable system, is a much more efficient technique for optimization (Alok et al. 2013; Aarthi and Karna 2012; Baskar and Renganathan 2012; Zhou et al. 2013; Mayur et al. 2013). Central composite design (CCD) is widely employed for bioprocess optimization studies and it can give information about the interaction between variables, provide information necessary for design and process optimization. The aim of the present work is to screen and optimize the process variables for EPS production from A. pullulans MTCC 2195 using statistical techniques.


