
Abstract

For fast and easy isolation of inhibitor-free genomic DNA even from the toughest plant leaf samples, including those high in polyphenols and polysaccharides, a protocol has been developed. To prevent the solubility of polysaccharides in the DNA extract, high salt concentration (1.4 M) was used in the extraction buffer. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was used for the removal of polyphenols as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) inhibitors. Proteins like various enzymes were degraded by proteinase K and removed by centrifugation from plant extracts during the isolation process resulting in pure DNA and RNA ready to use in downstream applications including PCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), ligation, restriction and sequencing. This protocol yielded a high molecular weight DNA and RNA isolated from leaves and roots of recalcitrant plants which was free from contamination and color. The average yields of total RNA from roots and shoot of Betula and Grape ranged from 285 to 364 ng/µl with A260/A280 between 1.9 and 2.08. The RNA isolated with this protocol was verified to be suitable for PCR, quantitative real-time PCR, semi-quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, cDNA synthesis and expression analysis. This protocol shown here is reproducible and can be used for a broad spectrum of plant species which have polyphenols and polysaccharide compounds.



Introduction

The isolation of high-quality DNA and RNA is important in any molecular biology work because contaminants such as proteins, polyphenols and polysaccharides may interfere with enzymes such as restriction enzymes (in blotting techniques) and Taq polymerase [in polymerase chain reaction (PCR)] (Angeles et al. 2005). Isolation of high-quality nucleic acids from plant tissues rich in polysaccharides and polyphenols is often a difficult task. The presence of these substances can affect the quality and/or quantity of the nucleic acids isolated (Heidari et al. 2011). Polysaccharide contamination is a common problem in higher plant DNA and RNA extraction. DNA samples are often contaminated with polysaccharides, polyphenols, which are almost insolvable in water or Tris–EDTA (TE) buffer and are difficult to separate from DNA and RNA. These contaminants are readily identified as they impart a sticky gelatinous brown color to the DNA isolated and interfere with polymerases, ligases and restriction enzymes (Ogunkanmi et al. 2008).

Plant metabolites such as polysaccharides have a similar structure of nucleic acids and are not efficiently removed by most homebrew DNA and RNA isolation methods. Furthermore, the structural similarity allows contaminating polysaccharides in DNA and RNA preparations to interfere with the action of enzymes such as DNA polymerase and reverse transcriptase. Natural substances contained in plant tissues (shoots and roots), such as polysaccharides, inhibit polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to differing degrees. In particular, acidic polysaccharides are extremely strong PCR inhibitors. In this study, to prevent the solubility of polysaccharides in the DNA and RNA extract, high salt concentration (1.4 M) in the extraction buffer was used. In addition, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was included as an optional step for samples high in polyphenolic compounds, such as, Betula and grape leaves. This compound breaks the bond between DNA and RNA and phenolics, preventing loss of DNA and increasing DNA yield.

Although many protocols have been published for the isolation of total RNA from different plant tissues, the majority are not completely satisfying as they may be time consuming (Yin et al. 2011; Porto et al. 2010), technically complex (Carra et al. 2007; Ren et al. 2008), require ultracentrifugation steps (Carra et al. 2007) and are specific to a particular plant species (Ma and Yang 2011).

To our knowledge, this is the first report of a highly efficient method to extract DNA and RNA from roots and shoots of the recalcitrant plants.


