
Abstract

Rapid industrialisation, technological development, urbanization and increase in population in the recent past coupled with unplanned and unscientific disposal methods led to increased heavy metal levels in water. Realizing the need for development of eco-friendly and cost effective methods, the present investigation was done for the adsorptive removal of copper from aqueous solutions with Dromaius novaehollandiae eggshell and chitosan composite. By one variable at a time method, the optimum contact time was found to be 60 min with an adsorbent dosage of 8 g/L at pH 6, initial adsorbate concentration of 20 mg/L and temperature 30 °C. The equilibrium data followed Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models and pseudo second-order kinetics. The equilibrium adsorption capacity determined from Langmuir isotherm was 48.3 mg/g. From the Van’t Hoff equation, thermodynamic parameters such as enthalpy (ΔH°), entropy (ΔS°) and Gibb’s free energy (ΔG°) were calculated and inferred that the process was spontaneous, irreversible and endothermic. To know the cumulative effects of operating parameters, a three level full factorial design of Response Surface Methodology (RSM) was applied and the suggested optimum conditions were 7.90 g/L of adsorbent dosage, 20.2651 mg/L of initial adsorbate concentration and 5.9 pH. Maximum percentage of copper adsorption attained was 95.25 % (19.05 mg/L) and the residual concentration of the metal after sorption corresponded to 0.95 mg/L, which is below the permissible limits (1.3 mg/L) of copper in drinking water. The adsorbent was characterized before and after adsorption by SEM–EDS, FTIR and XRD. The FTIR analysis showed the involvement of carboxyl, hydroxyl and amino groups while XRD analysis revealed the predominantly amorphous nature of the composite post-adsorption and the peaks at 2θ angles characteristic for copper and copper oxide. The mechanisms involved in the adsorption of copper onto the adsorbent are chemisorption, complexation and ion exchange.



Introduction

Imperfect industrial activities like mining, electroplating, printing, photography, etc. and non-uniform technological development are the major factors contaminating the environment with toxic substances including heavy metals. These metals pose a significant threat to the environment and the health of living organisms because of their toxicity due to accumulation in living tissues. Metal cleaning and plating baths, pulp, paper board mills, printed circuit board production, wood pulp production, fertilizer industry, etc. are releasing copper into the environment. An ultra trace amount of copper is essential for living organisms but excess is detrimental. In human beings, ailments such as stomach upset and ulcers, liver and brain damage are caused by the excess concentrations of copper (Zhu et al. 2009). According to Safe Drinking Water act, copper has a permissible limit of 1.3 mg/L in drinking water (Johnson et al. 2002). Therefore removal of excess copper from the contaminated waters is the most important environmental issue of worldwide concern since fresh water is the basic need for biotic community. Also, depletion of copper sources could be avoided by recovery.

Many conventional methods have been developed for the removal of heavy metals from effluents such as sedimentation, ion exchange, filtration and membrane processes, electrochemical processes, chemical precipitation and solvent extraction. But these methods are inefficient when the concentrations of metals are low (below 100 ppm), and are also associated with certain disadvantages like high capital investment and operational costs, high sensitivity to operational conditions, significant energy consumption and production of large quantities of waste. To overcome these technical and economical barriers, development of ecofriendly, efficient and low-cost processes is of prime significance. In this aspect, adsorption is regarded as an innovative technology with the advantages of high efficiency and selectivity for adsorbing metals even when present in low concentrations, easy desorption of metals, recycling of the adsorbents and minimization of sludge generation.

During the last decade, several studies showed that microorganisms like bacteria (Arul Manikandan et al. 2014), fungi (Huang and Lin 2015; Kan et al. 2015) and algae (Ajjabai and Chouba 2009), agricultural wastes like Sophora japonica pods powder, coconut tree sawdust, sugarcane bagasse, water melon seed hulls and coir fiber (Amer et al. 2015; Putra et al. 2014; Gulbahar and Guzel 2013; Shukla and Shukla 2013), poultry wastes like shells/feathers (Ratna Kumari and Sobha 2012), Catla catla fish scales (Venkatesa Prabhu et al. 2012) and water snail/shrimp shell wastes (Mohanasrinivasan et al. 2014) could be used for bioremediation. Several synthetic polymer composites like activated carbon/chitosan, chitosan supported on porous glass beads, magnetic carboxymethyl chitosan, crosslinked alumina chitosan, Fe3O4/chitosan/polycomposite, crosslinked chitosan acrylonitrile copolymer and n-HAP/chitosan composite (Huang et al. 2014; Shen et al. 2013; Guijuan et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2012; Ramya et al. 2011; Rajiv Gandhi et al. 2011), mesoporus and ligand composites (Awual and Hasan 2015; Awual 2015; Awual et al. 2013, 2014a, b, 2015; Espergham et al. 2011; Ghaedi et al. 2009) etc. are effective in the removal of copper.

Irrespective of the biosorbent material, the main governing factors in selecting a suitable adsorbent are sorption capability, abundant local availability, low cost and ecofriendly nature. In compliance with the said factors, the authors used the discarded egg shell wastes (ES) from the poultry farms of Dromaius novaehollandiae (Emu) and synthesized DNES–Chitosan (CH) composite as an adsorbent to remove copper from aqueous solutions. ES material, considered a waste, can in fact serve two important functions: one is its utilization in the adsorption of toxic metals there by cleaning up the polluted water and the other is the avoidance of its own disposal cost. The emerald green coloured emu eggshells (DNES) and the soft gel forming chitosan (2-acetamido-2-deoxy-β-d-glucose-N acetylglucosamine) processed from white mushroom, Agaricus bisporus, were combined in the ratio of 5:1 to get DNES–CH composite. In the present work, uptake of copper by DNES–CH composite was investigated with respect to vital parameters like contact time, pH, adsorbent dosage, initial metal concentration and temperature. Pseudo first order, pseudo second order and intra-particle diffusion kinetic models were used to describe the process kinetics. To analyze the adsorption equilibrium, three isotherm models viz. Langmuir, Freundlich and Temkin were used. Maximum sorption capability predicts the amount of the sorbent required for effective sorption and it was obtained from Langmuir isotherm. From the Van’t Hoff equation, thermodynamic parameters such as enthalpy change (ΔH°), entropy change (ΔS°) and Gibb’s free energy (ΔG°) were calculated. To study the cumulative and interactive effects and optimization of copper adsorption process, full factorial design of RSM was applied with three independent variables at three levels. To know the interactions between the adsorbent and the adsorbate, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)–Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS), Fourier Transform Infra Red spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) analyses were performed.


