
Abstract

Lignocellulosic biomasses, exhibit resistance to enzymatic hydrolysis due to the presence of lignin and hemicellulose. Ionic liquids proved their applicability in lignin degradation, however, ionic liquid removal has to be performed to proceed to hydrolysis. Therefore, this study reports an in situ hydrolysis of empty fruit bunches (EFB) that combined an ionic liquid (IL) pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis. For enzyme production, palm kernel cake (PKC) was used as the primary media for microbial cellulase (PKC-Cel) from Trichoderma reesei (RUTC30). The obtained enzyme exhibited a promising stability in several ionic liquids. Among few, in choline acetate [Cho]OAc, PKC-Cel retained 63.16 % of the initial activity after 6 h and lost only 10 % of its activity in 10 % IL/buffer mixture. Upon the confirmation of the PKC-Cel stability, EFB was subjected to IL-pretreatment followed by hydrolysis in a single step without further removal of the IL. The findings revealed that choline acetate [Cho]OAc and choline butyrate [Cho]Bu were among the best ILs used in the study since 0.332 ± 0.05 g glucose/g and 0.565 ± 0.08 g total reducing sugar/g EFB were obtained after 24 h of enzymatic hydrolysis. Compared to the untreated EFB, the amount of reducing sugar obtained after enzymatic hydrolysis increased by three-fold in the case of [Cho]OAc and [Cho]Bu, two-fold with [EMIM]OAc and phosphate-based ILs whereas the lowest concentration was obtained in [TBPH]OAc. Pretreatment of EFB with [Cho]OAc and [Cho]Bu showed significant differences in the morphology of EFB samples when observed with SEM. Analysis of the lignin, hemicellulose and hemicellulose showed that the total lignin content from the raw EFB was reduced from 37.8 ± 0.6 to 25.81 ± 0.35 % (w/w) upon employment of [Cho]OAc in the compatible system. The PKC-Cel from T. reesei (RUTC30) exhibited promising characteristics that need to be investigated further towards a single-step process for bioethanol production.



Introduction

Lignocellulosic biomass has been attractive as a renewable and sustainable resource for biofuel production. Combined with an enzymatic hydrolysis, a process where enzyme converts the biomass to fermentable sugars, it offers the high yields to products vital to economic success (Yang et al. 2011). Despite its potential, lignocellulosic biomass has been quietly well-known for its high recalcitrant to chemical and biological degradation. Cellulose as the main component of lignocellulosic materials is sheltered by lignin and hemicelluloses that wrap the molecule (Laureano-Perez et al. 2005), making it difficult for enzymatic hydrolysis process to take place.

There are several pretreatment methods prior to hydrolysis process which could be employed to achieve cellulase-accessible substances, such as milling (da Silva et al. 2010), hot water treatment (Sreenath et al. 1999), steam explosion, acid (Sindhu et al. 2014) and alkaline hydrolysis (Zainan et al. 2013), irradiation (Ninomiya et al. 2013) and microbial treatment (Rashid et al. 2009). However, various drawbacks were reported for those approaches such as high energy input, cost, slow reaction and excessive degradation of products (Moran-Mirabal 2013).

Ionic liquids have been introduced recently as an alternative method to perform the pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass. These are organic salts in liquid form at below 100 °C and have been receiving considerable attention as substitutes for volatile organic solvents. They are non-flammable, non-volatile, and recyclable with remarkable properties of outstanding solvating potential, thermal stability, and tunable properties by suitable choices of cations and anions (Ghandi 2014). Ionic liquids serve as efficient tools for lignocellulose pretreatment in which they could disrupt the hydrogen bonds and expose the lignocellulosic material to the cellulase enzymes to facilitate the hydrolysis. A study by He et al. on the utilization of IL 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride ([Bmim]Cl) combined with HCl and water revealed a noticeable increase in reducing sugars after the successive stage of enzymatic saccharification. The yield of the reducing sugars observed after the pretreatment with IL was 95.1 % after a 48-h saccharification process, which is considered a great improvement compared to the untreated (25.6 %) and alkali-treated (82.2 %) corn stover.

Regardless of their potential, ILs come with a certain limitation when the enzymatic process is incorporated into the process (in situ). Many ILs induce different degrees of enzyme inactivation, and cellulose, as the enzyme with a function to hydrolyze cellulose, is not an exception. Ionic liquids may result in deactivation of cellulase, and this fact has been driving many types of research towards producing IL-compatible cellulases that can retain their activity in certain concentrations of the ILs. Some studies have reported commercial cellulase stability in several ILs as introduced by Wang et al. in 15 % [EMIM]OAc in the saccharification of yellow poplar biomass. Treatment of switchgrass was also reported in [EMIM]OAc followed by enzymatic hydrolysis at 10–20 % of the IL (Shi et al. 2013). Furthermore, cellulase enzyme stability was studied by the researchers to identify a compatible IL-enzyme system, such as in cholinium-based ILs (Ninomiya et al. 2015a). Another study of in situ application of cellulase was performed by He et al.. The study showed that a compatible IL-cellulase system was developed with the employment of cellulase from Galactomyces sp. CCZU11-1 to media containing IL 1-methyl-3-methylimidazolium dimethylphosphate [Mmim][DMP]. The reducing sugar yield obtained at 62.1 % in the IL [Mmim]DMP—water media containing 20 % (w/v).

Aside from the enzymes’ compatibility, the high cost of ILs and the concern over the environment on the disposal of ILs are also some of the main obstacles hindering the large-scale application in the pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass. Advantageously, ILs may have a good recyclability (Ninomiya et al. 2015c) and can be reused to reduce the cost and the impact on the environment. There are several methods to recycle ILs, and distillation of volatile solutes is always the first choice to recover the ILs due to their low vapor pressure. Other methods incorporated are extraction with organic solvents or supercritical carbon dioxide, as well as membrane separation processes. One could employ a method, but the recovered activity and the structure of the ILs might differ based on the type of the ILs used, the biomass type, and the pretreatment process engaged.

Considering the cost associated with commercial enzymes and ionic liquids, this study focused on obtaining locally produced cellulase by utilizing an abundant raw material, palm kernel cake (PKC), to serve as the media for fungal growth. Furthermore, turning to the synthesis of the ILs from their raw materials would cut the cost and increase the efficiency considering the possibility of recyclability of the ILs for several times. This approach could benefit the fermentable sugars production from lignocellulosic biomass for further applications such as bioethanol production at a lower cost in which the drawback of going through a multi-step process could be avoided. The cellulase enzyme (PKC-Cel) was tested for its compatibility with several ILs to seek its stability to be used without the requirement of regeneration. Although the report is not the first of its kind, however, these findings provide a contribution to the production of low-cost cellulase enzyme which is compatible with ILs, where this compatible IL-cellulase system is promising for the efficient pretreatment and subsequent hydrolysis of native biomass to produce biofuels in a single stage process.


