


Introduction

Microorganisms are used in various fields especially in industries due to their ability to produce various enzymes, among these enzymes is naringinase one of the great important enzymes (Deene and Lingappa 2013).

Naringinase (EC3.2.1.40) is a hydrolytic enzyme containing both α-l-rhamnosidase and β-glucosidase activities. Firstly, α-l-rhamnosidase hydrolyzes naringin into rhamnose and prunin (4,5,7-trihydroxy flavanone-7-glucoside), the prunin is then simultaneously converted into glucose and naringenin (4,5,7-trihydroxy flavanone) by the β-glucosidase activity (Yusof et al. 1990).

Naringinase is used in debittering of citrus juices, and naringinase also finds applications in the production of glycopeptide antibiotic, deglycosylation of flavonoids, and gellan depolymerisation (Kamiya et al. 1985; Puri et al. 2005). The hydrolysis products (rhamnose, prunin, and naringenin) showed biological activities and can be used as starting materials for the synthesis of substances applied in pharmaceutics, cosmetics, and food technology (Ellenrieder et al. 1998).

Naringin (4,5,7-trihydroxy flavanone-7-rhamnoglucoside) is a bitter flavonoid present in several citrus fruits, especially grapefruits (Puri and Banerjee 2000). Naringin is the source of undesirable bitterness especially in citrus fruit juice industry; therefore, it must be removed or reduced its levels from the processed products (Yusof et al. 1990; Hasegawa and Maier 1993). This bitter taste was decreased by the reduction of naringin content which was carried out using chemical methods, but this method had several drawbacks resulting in the inferior quality of fruit juice (Puri et al. 2005). Nowadays, microbial naringinase has completely replaced the chemical methods due to cost-effective production and economically viable process (Puri and Banerjee 2000).

Many carriers for enzyme immobilization are found in the literature; however, efficient commercial carriers suitable for immobilization of enzymes used in industries are few and relatively expensive (Bickerstaff 1995). Most carriers are based on synthetic or natural polymers. The immobilization technique would enable the reusability of enzymes for tens of times, easier product separation, reducing the enzyme and the enzymatic product’s cost significantly. To prepare a new carrier for enzyme immobilization, it is naturally an advantage if substances that are already permitted for use in the pharmaceutical or food industries can be utilized. Hydrogels such as alginates, carrageenan, and chitosan are polysaccharide families belonging to this category that are commercially available, have diverse features, and are available at a reasonable cost (Hugerth et al. 1997). One of the main disadvantages of these biopolymers is that they are usually used for immobilization of enzymes using non-covalent bonds due to the lack of functionalities, for example, immobilized glucoamylase using Ca-alginate gel coated with partially quaternized polyethyleneimine (Tanaka et al. 1984). Unfortunately, the entrapment of enzymes in hydrogels is often characterized by some diffusion of the biocatalyst from the support, particularly for enzymes with molecular weight less than 300 kDa (Tanriseven and Dogan 2002). Elnashar and Hassan, Elnashar et al., and Awad et al. have completely studied the covalently bond immobilizing enzymes by using hydrogels.

In this work, naringinase produced by marine-derived fungus Aspergillus niger was immobilized onto grafted alginate gel beads which consider as thermally stable biopolymer to improve the enzyme stability to be convenient for different industrial applications and evaluation of the effects of immobilization on naringin hydrolysis.


