
Abstract

Recombinant human PH20 hyaluronidase (rHuPH20) is used to facilitate dispersion of subcutaneously delivered fluids and drugs. This report summarizes rHuPH20 immunogenicity findings from clinical trials where rHuPH20 was co-administered with SC human immunoglobulin, trastuzumab, rituximab, or insulin. Plasma samples were obtained from evaluable subjects participating in ten different clinical trials as well as from healthy plasma donors. A bridging immunoassay and a modified hyaluronidase activity assay were used to determine rHuPH20-reactive antibody titers and neutralizing antibodies, respectively. rHuPH20-binding antibody populations from selected subjects with positive titers were affinity-purified and subjected to further characterization such as cross-reactivity with endogenous PH20. Among individual trials, the prevalence of pre-existing rHuPH20-reactive antibodies varied between 3 and 12%, excepting the primary immunodeficiency (PID) studies. Incidence of treatment-induced rHuPH20 antibodies was 2 to 18%, with the highest titers observed in PID. No neutralizing antibodies were observed. Within most trials, the kinetics of antibody responses were comparable between pre-existing and treatment-induced antibody responses, although responses classified as persistent were more common in subjects with pre-existing titers. There was no association between antibody positivity and either local or systemic adverse events. Pre-existing and treatment-induced antibody populations were of similar immunoglobulin isotypes and cross-reacted to endogenous PH20 to similar extents. No cross-reactivity to PH20 paralogs was detected. rHuPH20 induces only modest immunogenicity which has no association with adverse events. In addition, antibodies purified from baseline-positive individuals are qualitatively similar to those purified from individuals developing rHuPH20-reactive antibodies following exposure to the enzyme.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1208/s12248-015-9782-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Hyaluronan (HA) is a mega-dalton glycosaminoglycan which constitutes a component of the extracellular matrix. Due to its viscosity and high water binding capacity, the HA viscoelastic gel forms a barrier to fluid flow and molecular movement through the interstitial collagenous matrix present in the hypodermis. This places a limit on the volume and composition of fluids and drugs that can be injected into the subcutaneous (SC) space. To overcome this limitation, hyaluronidases purified from bovine or ovine testes have been employed for decades to facilitate dispersion and absorption of subcutaneously injected solutions, but their clinical use has generally been limited by impurity profiles and issues of hypersensitivity reactions (see for example). More recently, the human testicular hyaluronidase (PH20, encoded by the gene SPAM1) was cloned and described as a GPI-anchored protein that possesses hyaluronidase activity. This discovery allowed the engineering of a recombinant form of the human PH20 protein (rHuPH20) lacking the GPI anchor domain which can be purified to homogeneity with a specific activity 50- to 100-fold greater than commercially available animal-derived hyaluronidase products.

The suitability of using rHuPH20 to facilitate dispersion of injected fluids and drugs was demonstrated preclinically in models employing rodents as well as pigs (7–9). Clinical trials with rHuPH20 have been undertaken in the areas of rapid large volume hydration, rapid insulin and insulin analog delivery in subjects with diabetes (12–15), and delivery of large proteins such as immunoglobulins and monoclonal antibodies by SC rather than intravenous (IV) injections (9,16–21). Importantly, the use of SC rHuPH20 in combination with various drugs has been demonstrated to generate pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles that provide advantageous or comparable (i.e., noninferior) characteristics when compared to those obtained by IV injection of drug alone (16–20,22), and to increase the absorption rate of SC delivered insulin and its analogs as well as morphine among others. These data demonstrate the potential of rHuPH20 to facilitate the delivery of a variety of drugs in both acute and chronic clinical settings, either enabling transition to a more convenient, patient-friendly route of administration (e.g., conversion of treatments from IV to SC) or improving the PK profile of drugs that are typically administered SC (e.g., short acting insulin products).

Even though the use of human proteins as therapeutics can be expected to reduce immunogenicity relative to non-human proteins, the potential still exists of an antibody response. In fact, clinical immunogenicity of recombinant human proteins is frequently reported. The clinical relevance of those immune responses can vary widely and must be determined on a case-by-case basis through investigation of the impact of the immune response on product efficacy and safety. For example, anti-drug antibodies (ADA) may have significant impact on efficacy, through the development of neutralizing antibodies, and/or drug PK. Cross-reactivity of neutralizing antibodies with an endogenous counterpart can also occur, and in some cases this has been associated with grave clinical consequences. The potential impact of ADA has led to the development of regulatory guidelines for immunogenicity testing and reporting. Somewhat surprisingly, a number of cases have been reported in which pre-existing antibodies to biotherapeutics are present in a certain percentage of the population, prior to any exposure to the drug in question. The reason for these pre-existing antibodies is typically poorly understood, but their presence can complicate the interpretation of anti-drug antibody testing results obtained after administration of the drug in question.

Since rHuPH20 has been used clinically to facilitate dispersion and absorption of several co-administered biotherapeutic agents, it represents a unique opportunity to evaluate immunogenicity in multiple patient populations and dosing regimens. This report summarizes rHuPH20 immunogenicity findings from clinical trials where rHuPH20 was co-administered SC with human immunoglobulin, trastuzumab, rituximab, and insulin. In addition, a study was undertaken to determine the baseline prevalence of rHuPH20-reactive antibodies in the general population. Finally, antibodies from subjects who became positive for rHuPH20-reactive antibodies following exposure to rHuPH20 were characterized along with pre-existing antibodies from subjects who had never been treated with hyaluronidase. Results suggest that rHuPH20 induces only modest immunogenicity, with no meaningful changes to adverse event profiles. In addition, antibodies purified from individuals with pre-existing positive titers have isotypes and binding characteristics to endogenous PH20 similar to those purified from individuals developing rHuPH20-reactive antibodies following exposure to the protein.


