
Abstract

To control the severe problem of microbiologically influenced corrosion, industries require highly potent antibacterial agent which can inhibit the growth of bacteria on man-made surfaces. This need drove the research towards the synthesis of nanoscale antimicrobial compounds. We, therefore, screened several bacteria for the biosynthesis of copper/copper compound nanoparticles which could inhibit the growth of Desulfovibrio marinisediminis, a sulfate reducing bacterium. Supernatant of thirty bacteria isolated from the biofilm formed on ship hull was mixed with 1 mM CuCl2 solution at room temperature. Eight bacterial strains, whose mixtures exhibited colour change, were selected for antimicrobial test. One nanoparticle which has been biosynthesized by Shewanella indica inhibited the growth of D. marinisediminis. Characterization of this particle by UV–visible spectrophotometer, XRD, TEM, DLS and FTIR showed that the particle is polydisperse CuO nanoparticle with average size of 400 nm.



Introduction

Paint and coating industries get the benefit by the use of NP to reduce corrosion. Addition of NP modifies morphology, conductivity and different physical properties of coats and provides superior resistance against metal corrosion (Montemor 2014). Microorganisms have an important role in corrosion. They cause rapid and severe type of corrosion failure which is well documented by many industries including shipping industry, offshore oil and gas production, power plants and coastal industrial plants (Licina and Cubicciotti 1989; Bodtker et al. 2008; Inbakandan et al. 2010). To manage microbial corrosion, nano-scale materials such as nanosilver and nanotitanium dioxide with potent antimicrobial activity are used to inhibit the microbial growth (Yu et al. 2003; Naik and Kowshik 2014). Copper and copper oxides are other nanoparticles possessing high toxicity. Their toxic effect found to be due to generation of reactive oxygen species, lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation and DNA degradation in the bacterial cells (Chatterjee et al. 2014).

These compounds have been synthesized by physical and chemical methods including thermal reduction, vacuum vapor deposition, microwave irradiation, chemical reduction, and laser ablation methods (Liu and Bando 2003; Zhao et al. 2004; Tilaki and Mahdavi 2007; Dang et al. 2011; Sohrabnezhad et al. 2014). In these methods, hazardous chemicals are being used for the synthesis of Cu and CuONP.

A growing need for simple and viable alternative to toxic chemical and/or physical methods drives researcher to synthesize NP by environment-friendly techniques. There are many reports on antimicrobial activity of available biosynthesized nanoparticles (NP) and accessible bacteria rather than specific ones such as sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) (Demurtas and Perry 2014; Haider et al. 2014; Khatoon et al. 2015; Razi et al. 2015). SRB are anaerobic bacteria reducing sulfate to corrosive sulfide causing severe corrosion of metals. Many industries including maritime industries experience corrosion problems due to the presence of SRB (Wade et al. 2011). Since the antimicrobial activities of NP are dependent on the physiochemical properties of NP and type of bacteria, in the present study, we screened biosynthesized CuONP which have antimicrobial activity against Desulfovibrio marinisediminis GSR3, a corrosion causing bacteria isolated from the ship hull.


