
Abstract

The objective of the present study is to detect genetic impurity in the seed lots of CMS lines, restorers and hybrids and to identify signature markers to differentiate parents and hybrids through DNA-based assays. Furthermore, attempts have been made to find out an alternative to Grow-Out-Test, which is very tedious, time consuming and used conventionally for seed genetic purity testing since beginning of quality seed multiplication chain. Fifty-one rice-specific sequence tagged microsatellite (STMS) primer pairs distributed throughout the rice genome were employed for fingerprinting of eight rice hybrids and their parental lines with a view to assess variation within parental lines and to test the genetic purity of the commercial seed lots. Among those, 51 markers, 28 microsatellite markers showed polymorphism (54.90 %). A total of 98 alleles were obtained with an average of 1.92 alleles per primer pair and number of alleles amplified for each primer pair ranged from 1 to 4. A set of markers were identified to differentiate parental lines of the hybrids and which emphasizes the immense scope of those molecular markers for their use in the unambiguous identification of hybrid, which would be of great benefit to farmers that depend on the hybrids.



Introduction

Rice, Oryza sativa is one of the most important staple food crops in the world. About 90 % of rice is grown and consumed in Asia. The food security of more than half the world population depends upon the ability of the world to produce and supply this life-line staple food crop for our survival, sustenance and perpetuation. It has been estimated that rice production in India as well as in several other Asian countries must be doubled by 2025 A.D to meet the emerging requirements of the booming up population (Hossain 1996; Paroda 1998). Further, very recently upon considering the global climate change, it has been projected that global food production needs to be increased by 70 % by 2050 to meet the demand caused by increasing global population and thereby consumption (Varshney et al. 2011). India is considered to be leader in hybrid technology and has developed hybrids in as many as eight crops, which has boosted the productivity and production in several crops. Hybrids have a yield advantage of at least 15–20 % over high yielding inbred lines and gaining popularity in the farming community day by day being a productive input for more profitability. Hybrid technology has been exploited in many crops and poses major challenges in sustaining the benefits of hybrid technology by ensuring the genetic purity of the hybrid seeds supplied to the farmers, mostly by the private companies at very high cost. In a self-pollinated crop like rice, one of the major challenges is the production and supply of adequate quantities of pure inbred and hybrid seeds to the farmers for large-scale cultivation to augment production. It is estimated that for every 1 % impurity in the hybrid seed, the yield reduction is 100 kg per hectare (Mao et al. 1996). Maintenance of high level of genetic purity of inbred, parental lines and hybrid is thereby inevitable and indispensable to harness the benefit of high heterosis, which is the key to bring success in hybrid husbandry of any economically important crop in the public domain.

The genetic purity during multiplication stages is prone to contamination due to the presence of pollen shedders as well as physical admixtures during processing. Genetic purity test is conventionally done to assess any deviation from genuineness of the variety during its multiplications and is a compulsion for seed certification of different categories of seeds though it is very much stringent for breeder seeds since it makes the foundation of seed multiplication chain. Unambiguous identification of crop varieties and hybrids is essential for their intellectual property right (IPR) protection, prevention of unauthorized commercial use and misuse of brand name by selling spurious seeds, etc., which are rampant in India inspite of 30 regulatory rules, laws and amendments in vouge.

The purity of hybrid seed is conventionally assayed by conducting Grow-Out-Test (GOT) involving representative sample of the seed to be marketed. A set of qualitative and quantitative characters known as “descriptors” stringently related to seed quality are currently used for varietal identification. Some of the characters, particularly those showing quantitative inheritance, interact with the environment and thus make the process of variety identification empirical and sometimes illusive due to masking effect of G × E interaction. Moreover, GOT is time consuming (takes one full growing season for completion), tedious and highly vulnerable to manpower abuse and infrastructure used. Molecular markers, in contrast, being based on DNA sequence variation, provide an unbiased means of identifying crop varieties. Among the various DNA-based markers currently available, the sequence tagged microsatellite (STMS) markers are most widely used for rapid genetic purity assessment of the hybrid and parental lines (Yashitola et al. 2002; Nandakumar et al. 2004; Antonova et al. 2006; Sundaram et al. 2008 and Pallavi et al. 2011). Microsatellite markers being co-dominant in nature are preferred as desirable markers (markers of choice) in rice besides their abundance and uniform distribution throughout the genome (Akagi et al. 1996; McCouch et al. 1997). Availability of more than 2740 mapped microsatellite markers with an average density of one STMS for every 157 kb (<1 cm) of the rice genome (Cho et al. 2000; Temnykh et al. 2000; McCouch et al. 2002) has greatly improved their utility in genetic purity assessment.

The present study was undertaken to identify a set of STMS markers for fingerprinting of eight rice hybrids and their parental lines, which are being used in production en masse so that their genetic purity can be assessed and restored as well as the Sovereign right of the producers is protected by halting biopiracy. In addition, the utility of those markers was validated for the purpose of testing the genetic purity of the commercial seed lot.


