
Abstract

Turnip (Brassica rapa ssp. rapa) is an important vegetable crop producing glucosinolates (GSLs) and phenolic compounds. The GSLs, phenolic compound contents and transcript levels in hairy root cultures, as well as their antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer activity were studied in turnip. Transgenic hairy root lines were confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and reverse transcription-PCR. GSLs levels (glucoallysin, glucobrassicanapin, gluconasturtiin, glucobrassicin, 4-methoxyglucobrassicin, neoglucobrassicin and 4-hydroxyglucobrassicin) and their gene expression levels (BrMYB28, BrMYB29, BrMYB34, BrMYB51, BrMYB122, CYP79 and CYP83) significantly increased in hairy roots compared with that in non-transformed roots. Furthermore, hairy roots efficiently produced several important individual phenolic compounds (flavonols, hydroxybenzoic and hydroxycinnamic acids). Colorimetric analysis revealed that the highest levels of total phenol, flavonoid contents, and their gene expression levels (PAL, CHI and FLS) in hairy roots than non-transformed roots. Our study provides beneficial information on the molecular and physiological active processes that are associated with the phytochemical content and biosynthetic gene expression in turnip. Moreover, antioxidant activity, as measured by DPPH scavenging activity, reducing potential, phosphomolybdenum and ferrous ion chelating ability assays was significantly higher in hairy roots. Hairy root extracts exhibited higher antimicrobial activity against bacterial and fungal species. The extract of hairy roots showed inhibition of human breast and colon cancer cell lines.



Introduction

Cruciferous vegetables are a major food source all over the world, and they contain important phytochemicals such as glucosinolates (GSLs) and their breakdown products. GSLs are nitrogen (N)- and sulfur (S)-rich anionic phytochemicals that are derived from a glucose molecule and an amino acid, and are also known as β-thioglucoside-N-hydroxysulfates (Bennett et al. 2004). GSLs have been classified into three major groups, namely, aliphatic (AGSLs), aromatic, and indolic glucosinolates (IGSLs), derived from the amino acids of methionine, phenylalanine, and tryptophan, respectively (Kastell et al. 2015). Epidemiological studies demonstrate that a high consumption of cruciferous vegetables significantly reduces the risk of certain cancers and cardiovascular diseases, presumably because GSLs breakdown products and act as chemoprotective agents (Hong and Kim 2008; Thiruvengadam and Chung 2015). Turnip (Brassica rapa ssp. rapa), which belongs to the Cruciferae family, is one of the most important leaf and root vegetable crops for human consumption, and it is also used for animal fodder. Turnip roots contain high amounts of GSLs, phenolic compounds and other bioactive compounds (Zhang et al. 2008; Thiruvengadam and Chung 2015). GSLs biosynthesis is positively regulated by various R2R3 MYB transcription factors. MYB34, MYB51, and MYB122 are involved in the regulation of IGSLs biosynthesis, while MYB28, MYB29, and MYB76 are participating in the regulation of AGSLs biosynthesis in Arabidopsis (Sønderby et al. 2010). The core structures are formed via oxidation by cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP79 and CYP83), followed by C-S cleavage, glucosylation, and sulfation. CYP79F1 oxidizes all methionine derivatives with a preference for short-chain precursors and is involved in the biosynthesis of AGSLs. CYP83B1 has a high affinity for the indole-3-acetaldoxime derived from tryptophan and for aromatic aldoximes derived from phenylalanine or tyrosine and involved in the biosynthesis of IGSLs (Kastell et al. 2015). Phenylpropanoids are a large group of phytochemicals formed by plants and are derived from the amino acid precursors, and have been reported to have multiple biological effects, including antioxidant activity (Thiruvengadam and Chung 2015). Flavonoids are synthesized through the phenylpropanoid pathway, converting phenylalanine into 4-coumaroyl-CoA, which finally enters the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway.

The production of bioactive compounds through field grown of intact plants has various disadvantages, including low yields, slow growth cycles, and fluctuations in quantity due to unfavorable environmental conditions, infestation, and disease. Hairy root culture technology is an attractive alternative system for the uniform production of bioactive compounds, can continuously provide high-value medicines, foods, and healthy constituents, independent of geographical, climatic, or environmental variations and constraints (Wilson and Roberts 2014). Hairy root cultures produced via Agrobacterium rhizogenes-mediated transformations have emerged as an ideal biotechnological system for the production of valuable phytochemicals because of their genetic stability and large-scale biomass production without phytohormones (Chandra and Chandra 2011). The greatest benefit of hairy roots is that they frequently exhibit about the same or superior biosynthetic capacity for secondary metabolite production as their parent plants (Kim et al. 2002; Chandra and Chandra 2011). Hairy root cultures have been commonly studied for the production of bioactive compounds useful as medicines, cosmetics, and food additives (Georgiev et al. 2007; Medina-Bolivar et al. 2007; Majumdar et al. 2011; Nagella et al. 2013; Thiruvengadam et al. 2014). Root loci (rol) genes harbored by the root-inducing (Ri) plasmid of A. rhizogenes are integrated into the host plant genome, causing hairy root (Chandra 2012). The rol genes are thought to affect the growth and development of transformed roots and to induce the secondary metabolite synthesis by activating transcription defense genes. Previously it was reported that rolC from A. rhizogenes T-DNA could stimulate the production of secondary metabolites in the transformed cells of different plants (Shkryl et al. 2008). Earlier limited studies have been reported in hairy root induction of turnip (Tanaka et al. 1985; Huet et al. 2014). However, only a few studies have been described in the individual GSLs content of hairy root cultures in Nasturtium officinale (Park et al. 2011), Sinapis alba and B. rapa (Kastell et al. 2013b), B. oleracea var. italica (Kim et al. 2013), and Arabidopsis thaliana (Kastell et al. 2015). In this study, we successfully established, for the first time, hairy root cultures to assess the production of GSLs (aliphatic, aromatic and indolic) and phenolic compound (flavonols, hydroxycinnamic and hydroxybenzoic acids) content in turnip. In addition, we studied the GSLs and phenolic compound gene expression levels of hairy roots and non-transformed roots in turnip. Finally, we evaluated the total phenolic, flavonoid content, and biological (antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer) activities of hairy roots and non-transformed roots of turnip.



Discussion

In this study, we found that leaf explants from in vitro seedlings of turnip were more successfully transformed by A. rhizogenes than hypocotyl or root explants. Similarly, leaf explants had a higher frequency of hairy root induction in Momordica charantia (Thiruvengadam et al. 2014), and Astragalus membranaceus (Jiao et al. 2015). PCR analyses of reference genes showed that most of the established hairy root lines carried the rolC gene in their genome but not the virD2 gene, confirming the genetic transformation of the roots and the elimination of the hairy root-inducing bacteria. In the present study, MS medium supplemented with 4 % sucrose had high biomass accumulation. Our results are consistent with those of previous studies that found 4 % sucrose produced more biomass accumulation in hairy root cultures of Stevia rebaudiana (Fu et al. 2015). It has been reported that MS medium is favored biomass accumulation in hairy roots of G. sylvestre (Nagella et al. 2013), M. charantia (Thiruvengadam et al. 2014), and Astragalus membranaceus (Jiao et al. 2015). Previous studies have described hairy root induction and variations in growth level during different growth stages in Nasturtium officinale (Park et al. 2011), G. sylvestre (Nagella et al. 2013) and M. charantia (Thiruvengadam et al. 2014). Nagella et al. reported that the FM (0.5 g) of G. sylvestre hairy roots increased ~9.4-fold after 25 days of culture in hormone-free MS liquid medium. Our results suggest that hairy root cultures of turnip are promising for large-scale biomass production in liquid cultures.

Previously, it has been demonstrated that higher GSLs concentrations were observed in roots than in shoots at the same developmental stages of radish and cabbage (Bhandari et al. 2015). Our results reveal the GSLs content as well as the gene expression profiles of corresponding biosynthetic pathways in hairy roots and non-transgenic roots of turnip. We found that aromatic GSLs and IGSLs contents were prominent in hairy roots compared with that in non-transgenic roots. Consistent with our reports, gluconasturtiin, glucobrassicin, neoglucobrassicin, 4-hydroxyglucobrassicin, and 4-methoxyglucobrassicin were previously found to be leading in hairy roots of watercress (Park et al. 2011) and broccoli (Kim et al. 2013). Aromatic glucosinolate of glucotropaeolin was higher in hairy roots compared to callus, cell suspension culture and two-month-old plant leaves of Tropaeolum majus (Wielanek and Urbanek 1999). In our investigation, AGSLs of gluconapin, progoitrin, and sinigrin significantly decreased in hairy roots compared with that in non-transformed roots. Kastell et al. (2013a) reported that AGSLs content was considerably lower in hairy root cultures compared to roots of whole plants in Arabidopsis. In our study, the transcription factors associated with AGSLs (MYB28, MYB29 and CYP79F1) was slightly high expression whereas IGSLs (MYB34, MYB51, MYB122 and CYP83B1) biosynthesis was a significantly high expression in hairy roots compared with non-transgenic roots. Similar with our study, Kastell et al. (2013b) reported that IGSLs significantly increased in hairy root cultures of B. rapa and S. alba. Transcript levels of aliphatic biosynthetic genes (MAM1, CYP79F1, CYP83A1, UGT74C1, and SUR1) were significantly lower in hairy root cultures compared to roots of intact plants of A. thaliana (Kastell et al. 2013a). Over-expression of CYP79F1 and CYP79F2 in hairy roots was upregulated the transcript levels and also highly increased the content of short-chain AGSLs than control hairy root line of A. thaliana (Kastell et al. 2015).

The present investigation, phenolic compounds were higher in hairy roots than non-transformed roots. Consistently, Weremczuk-Jezyna et al. and Thiruvengadam et al. demonstrated that total phenolic and flavonoid content was higher in hairy roots than that in non-transformed roots of Dracocephalum moldavica and M. charantia. Previously it has been demonstrated that phenolic compound levels are 20-fold higher in extracts from hairy root cultures than that in the control normal plant of Beta vulgaris (Georgiev et al. 2010). Park et al. have demonstrated that both transformed and non-transformed roots of Platycodon grandiflorum had similar concentrations of phenolic compounds. Kim et al. stated that hairy roots produced higher amounts of catechin, rutin, quercetin, caffeic, chlorogenic, ferulic and gallic acids than non-transgenic roots of Fagopyrum tataricum. Similar to our reports, chlorogenic, protocatechuic, and ferulic acid content was higher in hairy roots than that in non-transformed roots of tomato (Singh et al. 2014). Consistently, hairy root cultures have been used for the large-scale production of chlorogenic acid derivatives in Stevia rebaudiana (Fu et al. 2015). The stimulation of phenolic and flavonoid biosynthetic genes are corresponds to the higher accumulation of phenolic and flavonoid contents in hairy roots. In our investigations, the transcription factors associated with phenolic and flavonoid (PAL, CHI and FLS) biosynthesis were highly expressed in hairy roots compared with non-transgenic roots. Similarly, the expression levels of phenolic and flavonoid (PAL, CHI and FLS) biosynthesis and also phenolic contents were highly expressed in hairy roots of F. tataricum (Thwe et al. 2013, 2014).

Antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer activity may be correlated with phenolic compounds (Lee et al. 2004; Daglia 2011). In our study, hairy roots showed higher antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer activity than non-transformed roots. Similarly, hairy roots of Beta vulgaris (Georgiev et al. 2010), D. moldavica (Weremczuk-Jezyna et al. 2013) and M. charantia (Thiruvengadam et al. 2014) exhibited high antioxidant activity. It has been reported that catechin, kaempferol, myricetin, naringin, quercetin, and rutin have good antimicrobial activity against human pathogenic microorganisms (Cushnie and Lamb 2005). Previously, it has been reported GSLs was significant anticancer activity and also antimicrobial activity, which might be beneficial in controlling human pathogens through the diet (Sisti et al. 2003; Hong and Kim 2008; Aires et al. 2009). Based on the present study, the levels of GSLs, phenolic compounds increased in transgenic hairy roots, which directly influenced their antioxidant, antibacterial, antifungal, and anticancer potential. Similar to our study, antimicrobial spectra of hairy root extracts were more effective against Gram-positive bacteria than Gram-negative bacteria (Wang et al. 2012). Previously, several reports corroborated with our study that hairy roots exhibited higher antibacterial and antifungal activity compared to non-transformed roots (Wang et al. 2012; Thiruvengadam et al. 2014). Syklowska-Baranek et al. reported that hairy roots exhibited higher anticancer activity compared to non-transformed roots of Lithospermum canescens. In this study shows the MTT assay resulted that hairy root cultures of turnip can inhibit the growth of breast and colon cancer cell lines. This inhibition of cell growth could be attributed to its GSLs and phenolic compounds content. Our results suggest that transformed hairy roots can be effectively used for the antioxidant, antimicrobial and anticancer treatments.
