
Abstract

Tossa jute is an important natural fiber crop of Southeast Asian countries including India, Bangladesh, China, Thailand, Myanmar etc. Traditional industrial application of jute fiber is limited to the packaging products like hessians, sacks, etc. and the fiber found unsuitable for textile industries largely due to significantly high lignin content. Therefore, understanding genetic factors underlying lignin biosynthesis in tossa jute holds promise for jute based product diversification. The major limiting factor in undertaking such study is unavailability of efficient protocol for RNA extraction at secondary growth active stage of tossa jute. Here we report a simplified, swift and cost effective protocol for isolating fairly good quality RNA from bark tissue of 65-days-old field grown tossa jute plant with active secondary growth. The purity, concentration and integrity of extracted RNA ascertained. To confirm downstream amenability, isolated RNA samples were reverse transcribed and PCR analysis done by using CCoAMT1 primer. Results established that method of RNA extraction presented here is an improvement over the other methods, particularly for bark tissue of field grown tossa jute at advance developmental stage. Therefore, present study will enhance our ability to understand expression pattern of fiber formation and maturation related genes in mature bark tissue that holds key for much talked genetic manipulation of fiber quality via lignin optimisation in the crop.



Introduction

Tossa jute (Corchorus olitorius L.) is an annual herbaceous dicot plant, belongs to family Malvaceae and mostly cultivated in Southeast Asian countries as a fiber crop. Besides, traditional applications in hessian and packaging industries, jute fiber valued for potential diversified industrial applications including yarn, ethanol and different grades of high quality pulp production (Rio et al. 2009). With the changing fragile climate and fast depleting natural resources their commercial prospects seems brighter than ever before.

To tap these opportunities jute fiber quality need to be improved as per industrial standards that warrant precise understanding of fiber developmental and maturation process in the crop. Isolation of pure and un-degraded RNA from tossa jute bark tissue actively producing secondary phloem fiber cells is the fundamental requisite for any such downstream analysis. Although, number of RNA isolation protocols developed across planta using either guanidinium thiocyanate or phenol/SDS (Tan and Yiap 2009) but found difficult in polysaccharides, oil and other secondary metabolites like phenolic compounds rich plants (Ghawana et al. 2011). This problem is particularly acute in case of tossa jute bark rich in mucilage; a highly acidic and proteinaceous compound (Stephen et al. 2006). Mucilage often binds to other secondary metabolites, co-precipitates with nucleic acids during extraction (Samanta et al. 2011) and thereby adversely affect downstream operations like gene expression analysis (Mahmood et al. 2011). Jute plants are also rich in phenolic compounds (Oboh et al. 2012) that produce quinones upon oxidization and hinder RNA isolation and/or downstream applications by binding with RNA (Loomis 1974). In addition, secondary metabolites found in the plant often co-precipitate with RNA and affect yield, quality (Bugos et al. 1995) and interfere with downstream applications (Ghawana et al. 2007). Concentration of these compounds particularly mucilage accentuated with tissue age due to formation of wide mucilage canals from surrounding mucilage cells (Kundu et al. 1959). As a result, no protocol has been described in literature to extract RNA from tossa jute bark tissue old enough to actively produce secondary phloem fibers. Here we report a simple, swift and cost effective protocol for isolating good quality RNA from bark tissue of 65-days-old field grown tossa jute plant at optimum increment percentage of phloem fiber cells.


