
Abstract

Microalgae that can grow fast and convert solar energy into chemical energy efficiently are being considered as a promising feedstock of renewable biofuel. Mass production of microalgal oil faces a number of technical barriers that make the current production of biodiesel economically unfeasible. Small size (≈1–20 μm) and negatively charged surface of the microalgal cells pose difficulties in the process of harvesting. This leads to significant increase in the overall cost of biomass production. The present study explored different methods and conditions for harvesting of Chlorella sp. MJ 11/11 and Synechocystis PCC 6803. A customized air-lift reactor was used for the cultivation of biomass under photoautotrophic condition. Significant improvement in the rate of productivity of biomass was observed. Maximum biomass productivity of 0.25, 0.14 g L−1 d−1 for Chlorella sp. MJ 11/11 and Synechocystis PCC 6803, respectively, were obtained. Various flocculation techniques viz. auto-flocculation, inorganic, chitosan and electrolytic flocculation were used for the recovery of biomass. Among all the techniques, electro-flocculation showed high flocculation efficiency (98 %) and floatation of floc causing easy harvesting. Moreover, low-cost and easy control of the process justify electro-flocculation as a most suitable and promising technique for the recovery of microalgal cells.



Introduction

Microalgal biomass is considered as a renewable feedstock for production of fuels, feed, nutraceutical and pharmaceutical products. Algal cultivation requires minimum nutritional input. They may be used for wastewater bioremediation. The biomass generated from such processes can be used for production of third generation of biofuels like biodiesel, bioethanol, biohydrogen, biobutanol, and other biofuels (Skjanes et al. 2007; Nayak et al. 2013). For the commercialization of bioproducts from microalgae, a large amount of algal biomass is required. Harvesting plays a significant role in product development which separates the microalgal biomass from their liquid media. Development of cost-effective and environment-friendly methods for harvesting of algal biomass are still challenging for the future. Separation of algae is difficult mainly due to smaller particle size (1–20 μm), low cell density and low specific gravity of algal (Ghernaout and Ghernaout 2012). Several species of microalgae have different characteristics such as size, shape, and motility. These can influence their behavior towards flocculation techniques unlike other non-living particles in suspension (Vlaski et al. 1997). Most of the commercial organizations use centrifugation, the traditional method of harvesting. But it is an energy intensive process since it consumes a good amount of electric power (Chen et al. 2011). Some microalgae can be harvested using filtration, but membrane fouling limits the process due to clogging of the pore by extracellular organic matter (Wu et al. 2012). It can also be harvested using foam fractionation, but the energy consumption for large-scale harvesting systems is high. If algae oil is to be a viable future energy source, the harvesting problem will need to be overcome. So, development of an efficient harvesting strategy is a major challenge in the commercialization of products from microalgae. This step accounts for 20–30 % of the total cost of production (Grima et al. 2003). A suitable approach to harvesting is needed to minimize the cost, energy consumption and applicable for a wider range of conditions.

The harvesting of microalgae by flocculating agents has been found more promising over other methods. It allows to flocculate a large quantity of microalgal cultures and applies to a broad range of species (Uduman et al. 2010). The lower energy consumption and costs render it as an attractive technique. Microalgal cell suspensions are stabilized by the surface charge of the cells. Microalgal cells carry a negative charge that prevents aggregation of cells in suspension (Nishifi et al. 2011). Various flocculation methods are used to destabilize the cell suspension. The addition of flocculants destabilizes the cell suspension for the creation of aggregates of microalgal cells. The surface charge can be neutralized or reduced by adding flocculants such as multivalent cations and cationic polymers to the broth. The increase in effective particle size of the cell leads to sedimentation and hence microalgal biomass can be recovered. Moreover, an inexpensive and nontoxic flocculation method is desired which would be effective in low concentration (Milledge and Heaven 2013). The flocculation efficiency varies with different flocculating agents, microalgal species and culture conditions (Henderson et al. 2008). The flocculation efficiency mainly depends on an electric neutralization effect after hydrolysis of the coagulant and emerging compression of the electrical double layer. This leads to the formation of the adsorbent bridges resulting in a macromolecular complex.

The aim of the present study was to increase biomass production and identification of suitable method for harvesting of Chlorella sp. MJ 11/11 (lipid rich) and Synechocystis PCC 6803. Different flocculating methods such as inorganic flocculants alum and FeCl3, bio-flocculant like chitosan, auto-flocculation, and electrolytic coagulation-flocculation were evaluated to recover the microalgal biomass from diluted suspension.


