
Abstract

Ziziphus nummularia from Rhamnaceae family is traditionally used for sedative-hypnotic, antipyretic and analgesic purposes; however, scientific validations are lacking. This in vivo study was undertaken to verify the above ameliorative properties of Z. nummularia root methanolic extract. Various fractions of the extract were assayed on Balb/c mice by open field, Brewer’s yeast-induced hyperthermia and acetic acid-induced writhing experiments. The significance of the outcomes was analyzed with statistical tests. Various fractions of the extract exhibited marked dose-dependent (p < 0.05) sedative-hypnotic and antipyretic activities. The biological efficacies were most pronounced between 50 and 100 mg/kg. Further, the acetic acid-induced abdominal constrictions were significantly (p < 0.05) attenuated by the extract. Chloroform fraction of the extract was most dominant followed by ethyl acetate. The demonstrated therapeutic attributes of Z. nummularia extract can be exploited to isolate pharmaceutically relevant compounds.



Introduction

Since the dawn of human race, plants are being used as medicines (Petrovska 2012). World Health Organization (WHO) statistics reflects that 80 % of the world population, mostly from developing countries still rely on botanical for health care (Khan 2014). A vast majority of conventional drugs and most of the complementary and alternative medicines (CAM) are plant-derived (Mainardi et al. 2009). For their benign toxicity compared to chemotherapeutics, phytochemicals are widely used against a plethora of infectious, metabolic and degenerative diseases (Pandey and Rizvi 2009). The health restorative applications of plant products are exhaustive, yet the significant are antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, anti-diabetic, analgesic, antimicrobial, antiulcer, etc. (Benzie and Wachtel-Galor 2011). The key phytochemicals have been characterized to be alkaloids, phenolic acids, flavonoids, terpenoids, sterols, saponins, tannins, etc., though each species has its distinct botanical repertoire. Most plants are geographically confined and the medicinal uses largely hinge on their local distribution and traditional knowledge on them (Saslis-Lagoudakis et al. 2014).

In this resource-depleted world, sustainability requires the search for food and medicine in the vicinity (Cordell 2011). Ziziphus is a genus in family Rhamnaceae with global distribution (Zhao et al. 2014). The common species of this genus are Z. jujube, Z. zizyphus, Z. mauritiana, Z. joazeiro, Z. lotus, Z. spina-christi, Z, spinosa, Z. oxyphylla, Z. oenoplia and Z. oxyphylla Edgew (Pawlowska et al. 2009). The ethnobotanical, phytochemical, economical, and pharmacological attributes of many species have been extensively studied. Some popular food and medicinal uses of this genus have been mentioned below. The drupes ‘jujube or Chinese dates’ are nutritious and popular fruits (Gao et al. 2013b). They are often processed into pulps, polysaccharides, antioxidants, pickles, jam, fermented (masau) (Adeli and Samavati 2014; Li et al. 2014; Elaloui et al. 2015). Usage of this genus as dietary supplements and herbal medicines in Tunisia (Elaloui et al. 2015), China (Plastina et al. 2012), Japan (Oshima et al. 2015), Korea (Kim et al. 2013), and other Asian countries (San et al. 2013) have been well-documented (Chen et al. 2014b). Many of the folkloric practices have been empirically validated now. The verified health benefits include antioxidant (Olajuyigbe and Afolayan 2011; Chen et al. 2014c), anti-inflammation (Yu et al. 2012), antibacterial and antifungal (Ghazghazi et al. 2014), antiulcerogenic (Wahida et al. 2007), immunomodulatory (Chen et al. 2014a), diabetes ameliorating (Goli-malekabadi et al. 2014), hepatoprotective (Kwape et al. 2013; Yue et al. 2014), hematopoietic (Chen et al. 2014b), antimutagenic (Boriollo et al. 2014), cytotoxic (Jafarian et al. 2014), and sedative-hypnotic (Gao et al. 2013a). The plant parts conferring the biological effects are diverse such as leaves (Nisar et al. 2007; Kwape et al. 2013; Goyal et al. 2013), fruits (Plastina et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2014a, b, c), seeds (Cao et al. 2010; San et al. 2013; Gao et al. 2013a), bark (Olajuyigbe and Afolayan 2011; Boriollo et al. 2014) and root (Rao et al. 2012).

Ziziphus nummularia, is a species of the above genus, and native to the arid regions of India (Bachaya et al. 2009), Pakistan (Abbasi et al. 2013), Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Egypt, and Israel (Desai et al. 2008). The versatile uses of this species have been depicted in an insightful review (Pandey et al. 2010). Ethnobotanical survey for wild edible and medicinal plants have projected it as a major species in tribal communities of Lesser Himalayas-Pakistan (Abbasi et al. 2013). This plant is known for its palatable and vitamic C-rich drupes. Literature search reflects its usage as an astringent, treatment of scabies and other skin diseases (Khare 2003). Its use as antidiarrheal in Sariska region of India (Upadhyay et al. 2011) and anthelmintic in Pakistan (Bachaya et al. 2009) is prevalent. Also, the analgesic and anti-inflammatory efficacy of its cyclopeptide alkaloid-rich leaf extract has been reported (Goyal et al. 2013). However, there is no information of its beneficial role in insomnia, anxiety, pain, and fever. Though, some other species of Ziziphus genus have been proven effective in easing those ailments such as Z. jujube (Jiang et al. 2007; Cao et al. 2010; Yeung et al. 2012; Awad et al. 2014), Z. oxyphylla Edgew (Nisar et al. 2007; Kaleem et al. 2013), Z. mauritiana (San et al. 2013). So, this in vivo study was undertaken to evaluate the sedative-hypnotic, antipyretic and analgesic activities of Z. nummularia root extracts as a pharmacological justification of its traditional usage and premise for future drug discovery (Fig. 1).Fig. 1The overview of Z. nummularia extract eliciting sedative, hypnotic, antipyretic, analgesics effect in balb/c mice

Fig. 1

The overview of Z. nummularia extract eliciting sedative, hypnotic, antipyretic, analgesics effect in balb/c mice



Discussion

The findings from this investigation suggest that the roots extract of Z. nummularia displays significant in vivo sedative-hypnotic, antipyretic, and analgesic effects. The open field test is one of the commonly used behavioral test protocol for screening of sedative and anxiolytic activity of substances in laboratory animals (de la Peña et al. 2013), whereas the phenobarbitone-induced sleeping time test (Inganakal et al. 2012) is employed for the assessment of hypnotic properties. The roots extract significantly reduced the movement of mice in the open field test apparatus implying the tranquilizing nature of its components. While the precise mechanistic of therapeutic role is not known, several probable causes were formulated. The allosteric modulation of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors in mice brain might be the underlying mechanism (Shrestha et al. 2012). The prolongation of the sleeping duration suggested the hypnotic properties of the extract. The effect could have been mediated by the induction of central nervous system (CNS) depressant activity by the bioactive components of the extract (Ya’u et al. 2011). In this investigation, the crude extracts showed remarkable sedative-hypnotic effect which varied upon fractionation. The chloroform fraction was most potent followed by ethyl acetate whereas the hexane fraction did not produce significant results. From the results, it could be assumed that the sedative-hypnotic constituents of Z. nummularia roots are mostly concentrated in chloroform and ethyl acetate fractions. Results revealed that Z. nummularia root extract elicits antipyretic effects in yeast-induced hyperthermia in the murine models. Chloroform fractions proved to be the most active fraction followed by ethyl acetate, suggesting the presence of pharmacologically important components in them.

The acetic acid-induced writhing test is considered very effective in detecting antinociceptive effects of various extracts. Its sensitivity is much higher than other methods (hot plate, tail flick, carrageenan-induced paw edema, formalin-induced paw licking, etc.) used for this purpose (Ramirez et al. 2010). The abdominal constrictions and the resultant painful sensations provoked by the acid has been attributed to the perturbation and interplay of bradykinin, prostaglandins, interleukin-1β (IL-1β), interleukin-8 (IL-8), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) (Ribeiro et al. 2000). The Z. nummularia root extract at the doses of 50–100 mg/kg, moderated the abdominal constrictions in a dose-dependent manner. One possible mechanism of this action could be the diminished production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) (Ying et al. 2014). The extract could be interfering with both central (opioid and cholinergic pathways) and peripheral (COX-2) pathways in eliciting the anti-inflammatory effects (Sawada et al. 2014). The chloroform fraction was the most effective followed by the ethyl acetate fraction in reducing pain and sensitivity. It indicates the accumulation of the antinociceptive constituents in these fractions.

Anxiety and sleep interruptions have become the norm of current stressful living (Han et al. 2012). Also, the instances of depression, suicidal attempts are soaring (Cash and Bridge 2009). Reliance on the prescription drugs is not free of side effects. The frequent intake aggregates the metabolic system in long term, becomes ineffective and overdose proves fatal. Opioid analgesics (buprenorphine, fentanyl, codeine, ativan, dextropropoxyphene, methadone, oxycodone, carisoprodol, etc.) overdose-caused death cases are rising dramatically (Paulozzi et al. 2012). The deadly combination opioid, benzodiazepines, and/or alcohol use poses huge risk of morbidity (Gudin et al. 2013). On the other hand, CAM are naturally sourced, thus pose lower genotoxicity compared to chemicals. In this regard, Z. nummularia root extract merits further investigation. Isolation of the functional constituents and their structural elucidation warrants impetus. In a preliminary screening study, the phytochemicals alkaloids (ziziphines), carbohydrates, saponins, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and tannins were found in the ethanolic extract of Z. oenoplia (Suksamrarn et al. 2005; Rao et al. 2012). These components might be instrumental in inducing the tested biological responses. The hypnotic efficacy of Z. jujuba Mill. jujubosides has been correlated to the impact on circadian rhythm and the serotonergic system (Cao et al. 2010). Further studies on the therapeutic importance of this plant might provide affordable medication to large section population in the developing countries. However, possible health risks must be verified for broader remedial applications.
