
Abstract

High levels of hepcidin, the main regulator of systemic iron metabolism, lead to various diseases. Targeting hepcidin and lowering its concentration is a possible form of intervention in order to treat these diseases. High turnover rate of hepcidin is a major drawback of therapies directly targeting this peptide. We developed two monoclonal antibodies ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 which inhibit hemojuvelin/repulsive guidance molecule C (RGMc) and downregulate hepcidin. We conducted single-application and dose response studies to understand the antibodies’ mechanism and subchronic toxicology studies to exclude safety-related concerns. Investigation was carried out at different biological levels through qPCR, Affymetrix, liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), histopathology, serum iron, unsaturated iron binding capacity (UIBC), and drug concentration measurements. After a single application of these antibodies, hepcidin expression in liver and its serum protein levels were reduced. Serum iron increased for several weeks. The RGMc antibodies show a pronounced dose response relationship in rats with h5F9-AM8 having an IC50 (UIBC) of approximately 80-fold higher than ABT-207. When hepcidin levels were downregulated, iron deposition in the liver was visible histologically 1 week post application. These antibody-mediated iron depositions were not associated with any adverse toxicologically relevant effect at the doses and time points evaluated. Iron depositions seen after 14 weekly treatments with ABT-207 were reversible in rats and in cynomolgus monkeys. Due to their long-lasting effects and excellent safety profile, both RGMc-blocking antibodies ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 are favorable clinical candidates for diseases characterized by high serum hepcidin levels like anemia of chronic disease.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1208/s12248-015-9770-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Anemia of chronic disease (ACD), also known as anemia of inflammation, is the most common anemia in hospitalized patients. ACD’s pathogenesis starts with an inflammatory response which is accompanied by inflammatory cytokine release mediating disease progression. The cytokines reduce production of erythrocytes, facilitate lysis of erythrocytes, and stimulate macrophages to store and retain iron as ferritin which ultimately leads to insufficient iron availability. In addition, interleukin-6 stimulates hepatic hepcidin expression and hepcidin in turn induces degradation of ferroportin thereby blocking iron release from macrophages and enterocytes into the circulation.

Hepcidin is the master regulator of systemic iron metabolism. It is synthesized in the liver and the synthesis is controlled by repulsive guidance molecule C (RGMc), a glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked glycoprotein (aka hemojuvelin). RGMc has been shown to bind to neogenin, an ubiquitously expressed transmembrane protein with numerous functions, and to bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6). RGMc- and neogenin-deficient mice show a decreased BMP signaling pathway and as a consequence reduced liver hepcidin expression suggesting that they jointly regulated the BMP/Smad-mediated signaling pathway of hepcidin regulation.

Due to the increased serum hepcidin levels in ACD, many strategies target hepcidin to reduce its serum levels to prevent ferroportin degradation. This enables ferroportin-induced iron to be exported out of the cell. Free iron released by ferroportin will be bound to transferrin in the serum which would then be accessible to consumer cells. Due to hepcidin’s high turnover rate with an estimated production rate of 7.6 nmol kg−1 h−1 and a half-life of 2.3 min in cynomolgus monkeys, inhibition of hepcidin can only be achieved by sustaining high dose levels or frequent dosing of anti-hepcidin antibodies.

ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 are humanized monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) developed at AbbVie. As previously reported, these mAbs possess mid (ABT-207) and high (h5F9-AM8) binding affinity towards repulsive guidance molecule A (RGMa) (Demicheva et al. in press Cell Reports 2015) and RGMc. RGMa shares 47% amino acid identity with RGMc and RGMc is conserved in rat, in monkey, and in human. Since the rat RGMc protein is responsive to a humanized antibody, most of the animal work was conducted in rats.

Here, we describe these RGMa/c antibodies in detail. RGMc is a crucial constituent of the neogenin-BMP6-BMP receptor complex most important for regulating hepcidin expression. Since both antibodies have long-lasting effects on hepcidin expression, the challenge of high hepcidin turnover rates could be overcome, making these antibodies suitable clinical candidates for the treatment of ACD.

In the first step to characterize these antibodies, we carried out single-dose studies with ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 in rats to understand time-course and duration of effects on iron metabolism. These studies were followed by dose response studies to establish the relationship between the dose of mAbs and the monitored iron metabolism effect. Since these antibodies are potential clinical drug candidates, hepatic microarray analysis and toxicology studies in two species were performed to analyze safety-related concerns. With all these studies, we could determine the no effect level (NOEL) for both mAbs and we could also demonstrate that both these mAbs are well tolerated. In addition, in vitro and in vivo pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) relationship between ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 could be established.



DISCUSSION

Iron-restricted medical disorders caused by excessive hepcidin, e.g., in ACD, iron-refractory iron deficiency anemia (IRIDA), or anemia of chronic kidney disease, are lacking suitable therapeutic options, and the current treatment strategies are accompanied by undesired side effects. All current approaches targeting hepcidin and bone morphogenetic protein receptor (BMPR) directly may have major drawbacks due to hepcidin’s high turnover rate and BMPR’s involvement in many other cellular processes.

ABT-207 and the affinity-matured h5F9-AM8 mAb are mAbs targeting repulsive guidance molecule (RGM) with specific binding affinity towards RGMa and RGMc, and this binding also inhibits the RGMc-BMP2/4/6 interaction. These antibodies differ in their binding affinity towards RGMa and RGMc (ABT-207 rat KD 59 nM and h5F9-AM8 rat KD 0.24 nM) (Supplementary Table 1). A cellular reporter gene assay, specific for RGMc-BMP2/4, showed that IC50 for these antibodies differed approximately 50-fold between ABT-207 (IC50 17 nM) and h5F9-AM8 (IC50 0.37 nM) (Kovac et al. submitted—under review). These data indicate that affinity maturation led to a more efficacious inhibition of the RGMc-BMP-driven effects. Since it is known that BMPs are deeply involved in iron metabolism pathway, we decided to investigate in vivo to which extent ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 are involved in iron regulation.

As ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 antibodies showed different efficacy in vitro, single-application studies were carried out for both antibodies. When we administrated 200 mg/kg ABT-207 or 20 mg/kg h5F9-AM8 to rats, we detected an increase in serum iron and a decrease in UIBC (Fig. 1a, b). With ABT-207, these differences were significant until week 3 post injection whereas treatment with h5F9-AM8 showed a higher magnitude and significantly longer-lasting effects up to six weeks. Liver hepcidin mRNA expression was significantly reduced for 8 weeks in ABT-207- and h5F9-AM8-treated animals; however, a more pronounced effect was seen for h5F9-AM8. Correlating to the data on mRNA level, the serum hepcidin protein concentration was suppressed significantly after ABT-207 application for 3 weeks and up to 6 weeks after h5F9-AM8 (Fig. 1c–f).

Since our antibodies bind to RGMc and block the RGMc-BMP interaction which induces downregulation of liver-derived hormone hepcidin, it is very likely that iron release through ferroportin is the intermediate step in this pathway. The data supports the abovementioned notion that these mAbs specifically act via the BMP-hepcidin-ferroportin pathway albeit with different efficacy. Xiao et al. reported that hepcidin has high turnover rate (approximately 2.3 min in cynomolgus monkeys), but the binding of our antibodies to RGMc and not directly to hepcidin solved this issue. Due to the antibodies’ long half-lives in rats (7.2–11.7 days), hepcidin was successfully downregulated for several weeks and this negatively correlates with the serum iron levels. The fading antibody effect was only seen after several half-lives when the antibody concentration is extremely low.

In order to evaluate the dose response relationship for ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8, dose escalation studies were conducted in rats. Antibody concentrations measured in serum samples of all animals were dose related. In rats dosed with ABT-207, an increase in serum iron and a decrease in UIBC were seen at a dose of 60 mg/kg/week (NOEL = 10 mg/kg). On the other hand, in rats dosed with h5F9-AM8, these changes were already observed at a minimal dose of 0.2 mg/kg/week (NOEL = 0.02 mg/kg) (Fig. 3). For both antibodies, a dose response relationship could be established for the UIBC. ABT-207 had an IC50 of 12.74 mg/kg and h5F9-AM8’s IC50 was 0.15 mg/kg, which had approximately 80-fold difference for this parameter (Supplementary Figure 3A and Supplementary Figure 4A).

With this result, we could establish a good correlation between the in vivo and in vitro data (Kovac et al. in preparation). Since both antibodies have comparable pharmacokinetic parameters, the differences in efficacy in vivo are most likely driven by the differences in their binding affinities.

In order to investigate the specificity of the antibody effect on hepcidin expression, we chose the affinity-maturated h5F9-AM8 antibody. A whole genome transcriptomic profiling (Affymetrix) experiment was conducted. There were a minimal number of global gene expression changes for the NOEL (0.02 mg/kg), mid dose (2 mg/kg) and the highest dose (20 mg/kg). The most downregulated gene in the dataset was hepcidin, and only minor modulations were apparent with respect to select BMPs and ferroportin (Slc40a1) (Fig. 5).

Based on this analysis, we conclude that h5F9-AM8 only induces iron effects and only minor perturbations on the liver. Potential toxicological consequences of excess iron may include production of free radicals and other reactive oxygen species. Gene expression signals indicate a minor induction of an oxidative stress response only at the 20 mg/kg dose, including increased GSTs and proteasome subunits. In order to quantify the dose response effect of h5F9-AM8, we analyzed hepcidin mRNA expression, serum hepcidin levels, liver iron deposition, and spleen iron content. Liver hepcidin mRNA expression and serum hepcidin level analyses revealed a closely related dose-dependent decrease for both parameters (Fig. 4). The IC50 for liver hepcidin was determined to be approximately 0.08 and 0.03 mg/kg for serum hepcidin (Supplementary Figure 3B-C).

Under some pathological conditions (hemochromatosis), low hepcidin levels result in increased serum iron, periportal iron accumulation in liver, and spleen iron depletion; we asked if this condition occurs due to the application of ABT-207 and h5F9-AM8 as well. Single-application studies with these antibodies showed periportal liver iron deposition between week 1 and week 9 in animals treated with 200 mg/kg ABT-207 and between week 1 and week 12 (end of study) in animals treated with 20 mg/kg h5F9-AM8. We also observed reduction of iron load of macrophages in the spleen within this time frame (Fig. 2). The PPB-stained liver and spleen tissue sections were quantified with a semi-automated morphometric analysis (Supplementary Figure 2). This analysis supported the qualitative histological findings confirming the stronger effect of h5F9-AM8 in comparison to ABT-207. Also in the dose response studies, a dose-dependent iron accumulation in the liver and iron depletion in the spleen was observed.

In order to access possible toxicological findings and reversibility of the effects generated, we conducted 13-week (14 weekly injections of ABT-207) toxicology studies followed by a 12-week recovery period in rats and cynomolgus monkeys. Besides the usual assessment of toxicology parameters, iron metabolism was monitored through serum iron, UIBC, and PPB staining (data not shown). Through the toxicology studies, we could demonstrate that rats were the more sensitive species (UIBC IC50 12.74 mg/kg/week) compared to the cynomolgus monkeys (UIBC IC50 34.73 mg/kg/week) (Supplementary Figure 4). The only finding induced by ABT-207 in these studies was a dose-dependent effect of ABT-207 on iron parameters which were assessed as non-adverse and showed reversibility for all serum parameters after the recovery phase.

In addition, all in vivo studies did not result in test item-related clinical signs, body weight changes, mortality, or any other adverse findings including morphological changes of all examined tissues. The antibody also had low immunogenic potential (very low evidence for the development of anti-drug antibodies (ADAs)).
