


Introduction

Chitin, an insoluble polysaccharide, is one of the most abundant biopolymers on earth and is composed of linear chains of β-1, 4-N–acetyl glucosamine residues that are highly cross-linked by hydrogen bonds. Chitin as a structural polysaccharide is present in the fungal cell wall, nematodes, exoskeleton of insects and outer shell of crustaceans. Chitin forms a significant proportion of dry weight of the waste generated from shellfish industry (Wang and Chang 1997). Annually, shellfish production and processing industry contribute to the accumulation of a substantial amount of chitin rich waste that may prove to be an environmental hazard (Wang et al. 2002).

From the environmental point of view, chitin utilization is extremely essential for proper carbon–nitrogen balance. The utilization of chitinous wastes often involves corrosive chemicals resulting in high cost, low product yields and environmental toxicity. Chitinases (EC 3.2.1.14) are widespread in several bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi and higher plants (Swiontek Brzezinska et al. 2014).

Bacteria synthesize chitinase to breakdown chitin and metabolize it as carbon and energy sources (Lien et al. 2007). Numerous species of Bacillus had been reported to synthesize chitinase and act as biocontrol agents since they display antagonism against a wide range of plant pathogens that infect several economically important crops (Collins et al. 2003).

However, it should be noted that the use of chitinases is limited as the production and characteristics of chitinases often do not satisfy the industrial standards. Therefore, efforts must be directed toward finding newer sources of chitinases, better production strategies and ability of these chitinases to function under a wide range of temperature and pH. Studies on media optimization for chitinase production are a worthwhile approach because different media constituents may affect the production of microbial chitinases. Simultaneously, enzyme characterization is equally important to determine the optimal conditions under which the enzyme demonstrates its maximum activity. The present study aims at isolation and identification of a potent chitinolytic bacterium from marine sediment, optimized production, purification and characterization of chitinase and testing in vitro antagonistic activity of the bacterial isolate against phytopathogenic Fusarium oxysporum.


