
Abstract

The diversity of some of the culturable microorganisms associated with marine flora and fauna collected off Vizhinjam and Mulloor coast of South India was evaluated and their bioactive production potential determined. From a total of 24 bacteria, 4 actinomycetes and 8 fungi isolated from diverse marine sources, five bacterial species-BLM3, BSP2, BCS1, BCS4 and BMA6 showed inhibitory activity against at least one of the tested pathogens viz., Klebsiella pneumonia KU1, Pseudomonas aeruginosa VL3, Salmonella enterica typhimurium MTCC 98, Escherichia coli MTCC 40, Micrococcus luteus MTCC 105, Staphylococcus simulans MTCC 3610, Proteus vulgaris MTCC 426, Vibrio fluvialis, Vibrio sp. P3a and Vibrio sp. P3b. The isolated actinomycetes and fungi did not produce significant inhibition zones against the tested pathogens; however, the macroalgal isolated actinomycetes strain AMA1 produced reddish pigment in Starch Casein medium which remained stable till the stationary phase of growth. The marine sediment isolate BCS4, identified as Bacillus sp. showed wide spectrum of activity against the tested Gram positive bacteria, S. simulans MTCC 3610 and Gram negative bacteria, Proteus vulgaris with zone of inhibitions of 25 and 11 mm respectively. Better extraction of the bioactive compound was obtained with ethyl acetate when compared with methanol, benzene and hexane and TLC analysis revealed the presence of an active compound. The 16SrRNA sequencing confirmed the potent strain belong to Bacillus sp. and hence designated Bacillus sp. BCS4.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-015-0318-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The increasing antibiotic resistance pose serious concerns in health sector and necessitates seeking natural alternatives. The marine ecosystem being less explored, have prospects for finding novel bioactive producing microbes. Marine microbes represent a distinctive group of organism owing to their immense genetic (Strobel and Daisy 2003) and biochemical diversity (Rusch et al. 2007) and are rich sources of a large variety of bioactive compounds (Debbab et al. 2010). These originate mainly in sediments but they are also present in open oceans in association with other marine organisms (Supriya and Yogesh 2010). Marine invertebrates and plants, in particular, represent an environment rich in microorganisms that produce compounds with bioactive properties including antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anticancer, antifouling and antibiofilm activities (Glöckner et al. 2012). The microbial symbionts were been crucial in the discovery of many bioactive compounds reported earlier. The competition among microbes for space and nutrients is one of the driving forces behind the production of precious antibiotics and other useful pharmaceuticals in the marine environment (Thakur et al. 2005b). Microorganisms associated with marine invertebrates are proved to be valuable candidates for drug discovery (Jensen and Fenical 2000; Hentschel et al. 2003; Imada 2004; Thakur et al. 2005a).

The marine microbes include cellular life forms such as bacteria, fungi and plankton, along with viruses that free load along with them. The marine bacteria represent one of the hardly untapped sources of potent therapeutic and novel drug leads. The emergence of multidrug resistant bacteria poses a major threat which in turn forces the discovery of new potent drugs to replace the conventional antibiotics. The decline in the discovery of newer antibiotics of the terrestrial origin necessitates exploring new ecological niches most notably the marine. Marine bacteria showing antibacterial activities have been isolated from various biotypes and most frequently isolated strains belong to the genus Bacillus, Micrococcus, Pseudomonas, Vibrio, Flavobacterium, and Alteromonas (Jayanth et al. 2001; Nithya et al. 2011; Eltmany et al. 2014; Marinho et al. 2009; Baranova and Eqorov 1989; Leon et al. 2010). However, a major constraint in the discovery of novel drugs from the marine microbes rely up on the fact that majority of the marine microbes are uncultivable in the laboratory conditions. Nevertheless, using cultivated microorganisms is still the only way to get detailed information about microbial characteristics and processes, thus highlighting the need to further focus on culturing microorganisms and developing better culturing techniques (Glöckner et al. 2012).

Marine microbes are rich and yet less harnessed source of structurally diverse secondary metabolites, many of which possess unique biological activities. The present study attempts to isolate and screen novel bioactive producing microbes from the Vizhinjam and Mullor area of the South-west coast of India, which are known for their rich biodiversity and novel compounds in them.


