


Introduction

The genus Ajuga (Lamiaceae) includes several ornamental and medicinal species distributed in the cooler parts of Asia, Africa, Australia and Europe. Ajuga species are used for the treatment of diabetes, diarrhoea, fever, gastrointestinal disorders and high blood pressure in traditional medicine. Phytochemical studies revealed that Ajuga species contains several bioactive compounds such as anthocyanidin-glucosides, essential oils, iridoid glycosides, flavonoids, phytoecdysteroids, sterols, terpenoids and withanolides (Israili and Lyoussi 2009). Ajuga multiflora Bunge is a perennial ornamental herb distributed in China, Korea, Siberia and Russia. It has been used for the treatment of fever in Korean folk medicine. A. multiflora is reported to contain a number of phytoecdysteroids, which have been shown to possess pesticidal activity against several insect pests (Chi et al. 2002). Owing to its medicinal importance, ornamental value and pesticidal activity, this plant has been overexploited. It is typically propagated by division of rhizomes, rooted cuttings or seeds. However, conventional propagation of A. multiflora is hampered by several factors such as poor seed viability, dependence on season and slow vegetative multiplication (Sivanesan et al. 2011). Thus, an effective large-scale propagation method is urgently needed to provide enough plant material for commercial exploitation (Sivanesan and Park 2015). Micropropagation is a useful method for mass clonal propagation of A. multiflora. Though in vitro propagation methods have been developed for A. multiflora (Sivanesan et al. 2011; Sivanesan and Jeong 2014; Sivanesan and Park 2015), there have been no published reports available on in vitro propagation of A. multiflora using shoot tip explants. Thus, the efficiency of shoot tip explants to regenerate A. multiflora plants has been explored.

Plant lipids are group of molecules that mainly include carotenoids, fatty acids, sterols and tocopherols. These molecules are essential for both human and plant health (Fiedor and Burda 2014). Lipophilic antioxidants such as carotenoids and tocopherols are frequently added to cosmetic, food and pharmaceutical products (Alvarez and Rodriguez 2000; Lu et al. 2015). Fatty acids are often prone to oxidation; thus, lipophilic antioxidants are found to co-exist with plant lipids, protecting the integrity and vitality of the plant (Tang et al. 2015). In vitro-developed calli, shoots and roots can be utilised to extract the phytochemicals (Jeong and Sivanesan 2015). Several bioactive compounds are produced by plant cell, tissue and organ cultures (Gandhi et al. 2015). Many studies on the production of valuable compounds such as anthocyanin, flavonoids, phenolics and phytoecdysteroids from in vitro cell, organ and hairy root cultures have been carried out on Ajuga species (Terahara et al. 1996; Callebaut et al. 1997; Madhavi et al. 1997; Kim et al. 2005; Cheng et al. 2008). However, no studies on the production of carotenoids, fatty acids and tocopherol from cell and organ cultures of A. multiflora have been reported. Thus, analysis of these compounds will provide a better understanding on biological activities of this plant species. The aims of this study were to determine the effect of plant growth regulators (PGRs) on axillary shoot proliferation from shoot tip explants of A. multiflora and evaluate the carotenoids, fatty acids and tocopherols contents in leaves of greenhouse-grown plants and in vitro-developed shoots.


