
Abstract

Aconitum heterophyllum is an important component for various herbal drug formulations due to the occurrence of non-toxic aconites including marker compound, atisine. Despite huge pharmacological potential, the reprogramming of aconites production is limited due to lack of understanding on their biosynthesis. To address this problem, we have proposed here the complete atisine biosynthetic pathway for the first time connecting glycolysis, MVA/MEP, serine biosynthesis and diterpene biosynthetic pathways. The transcript profiling revealed phosphorylated pathway as a major contributor towards serine production in addition to repertoire of genes in glycolysis (G6PI, PFK, ALD and ENO), serine biosynthesis (PGDH and PSAT) and diterpene biosynthesis (KO and KH) sharing a similar pattern of expression (2-4-folds) in roots compared to shoots vis-à-vis atisine content (0–0.37 %). Quantification of steviol and comparative analysis of shortlisted genes between roots of high (0.37 %) vs low (0.14 %) atisine content accessions further confirmed the route of atisine biosynthesis. The results showed 6-fold increase in steviol content and 3–62-fold up-regulation of all the selected genes in roots of high content accession ascertaining their association towards atisine production. Moreover, significant positive correlations were observed between selected genes suggesting their co-expression and crucial role in atisine biosynthesis. This study, thus, offers unprecedented opportunities to explore the selected candidate genes for enhanced production of atisine in cultivated plant cells.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0417-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Medicinal plants are the prolific repositories of specialized metabolites having great commercial value as drugs used in the treatment of various disorders. Traditionally, they have been used as a major source of medication for the treatment of various ailments. Later on, with the advent of chromatographic separations and advancement in organic chemistry, efforts began to isolate and identify the bioactive compounds in plants and strive to synthesize the compounds in vitro. Owing to the sophisticated structures of most natural products, it became a formidable task to synthesize them, and thus, the natural products remain gleaned from the native medicinal plants (Barnes and Prasain 2005). Further, the rising demand of natural products facilitated over-harvesting of several medicinal plants and as a result the reckless collection reduced their populations in natural habitats, thus falling into the category of endangered plant species.

Aconitum heterophyllum Wall, commonly known as Atis, is one of the rare medicinal herb in the Himalayan region of India found between 2400 and 3600 m altitude which has been listed as “critically endangered medicinal herb” by IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources) (IUCN 1993; Nautiyal et al. 2002). It has been banned for export on 30th March, 1994 by Govt. of India, Ministry of Commerce through their circular Public Notice No. 47 (PN)/92–97, and was further revised through Notification no. 24 (RE-98)/1997–2002 (Shah 2005).

Generally, Aconitum has been considered as a mysterious herb due to its both healing and death causing properties. Among the reported ~300 species of Aconitum, A. heterophyllum is the only non-toxic species with therapeutic potential (Chauhan 2006). The non-toxic roots of A. heterophyllum are used for the treatment of chronic fever, throat infection, indigestion, flatulence, diarrhea, arthritis, abdominal distension, dyspepsia, stomachache and coughs (Lather et al. 2010; Mitra et al. 2001; Negi et al. 2011; Prasad et al. 2012; Sojitra et al. 2013; Subramoniam et al. 2013). It has also been used in many herbal formulations, viz. Balachaturbhadrika churna, Rodhrasava, Siva Guika, Mahavisagarbha taila, Lakasminarayana rasa and Pancatikta guggulu ghrta (Nariya et al. 2011; Shyaula 2011). Moreover, it has also been used as an aphrodisiac and tonic (Semwal et al. 2009). The pharmacological properties of A. heterophyllum are attributed to the non-toxic active constituents, i.e., aconites which including atisine comprise the major alkaloid constituents of the plant (Malhotra et al. 2014). Therefore, gazing into the upsurge of interest in aconites and threat to its extinction, efforts need to be directed towards increased production of aconites in A. heterophyllum. In recent years, various strategies have been employed in other plants to modulate the level of desired metabolites but use of genetic intervention strategy has been suggested as the solution to such problem (Kumar et al. 2015a, b, e; Sharma et al. 2015). Therefore, rational engineering of aconites should be executed to redirect the carbon flux towards aconites production in A. heterophyllum. However, that requires a thorough knowledge of the entire biosynthetic pathway of aconites in A. heterophyllum.

Atisine is a diterpenoid alkaloid. The biosynthesis of diterpenoid alkaloids (DAs) has been scarcely investigated and so far there is dearth of reports available on their biosynthesis in A. heterophyllum. However, the atisine-type DAs corresponding to the basic skeleton of atisane-type diterpenes have been isolated from the Spiraea japonica complex (Hao et al. 2003). Atisine is thought to be produced from mevalonate (MVA) and non-mevalonate (MEP) pathways leading to the formation of diterpene precursor geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) (Malhotra et al. 2014), but information is not yet available on the biosynthesis of atisine beyond GGPP. To fill this gap, we constructed a metabolic network for the first time which showed the coordination and connecting links between different pathways integrating into atisine production to provide a more robust view of atisine biosynthesis in A. heterophyllum (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Plausible biosynthetic pathway leading to atisine in A. heterophyllum. The metabolic network has been constructed by including glycolysis, phosphorylated, glycerate, glycolate, MVA/MEP and diterpene biosynthetic pathways. Question marks indicate missing enzymes with no available information. Green color represents the positions of enzymes identified as candidate genes in atisine biosynthesis. Abbreviations are elaborated in supplementary Table 4

Fig. 1

Plausible biosynthetic pathway leading to atisine in A. heterophyllum. The metabolic network has been constructed by including glycolysis, phosphorylated, glycerate, glycolate, MVA/MEP and diterpene biosynthetic pathways. Question marks indicate missing enzymes with no available information. Green color represents the positions of enzymes identified as candidate genes in atisine biosynthesis. Abbreviations are elaborated in supplementary Table 4

Endorsement of plausible metabolic pathway for atisine in A. heterophyllum must be the important next step. For this, use of radioactive/stable isotope tracers required time and resource demanding experiments (Stephanopoulos 2012). Thus, in search of facile methods, we used a new tactic of ‘omics’ which provided the genomics inspired opportunities to correlate the patterns of gene expression with specific metabolites that not only pursued the genetic control of metabolite production, but also validated the biosynthetic route of target metabolites (Askenazi et al. 2003).

To enable this, quantitative real time-PCR (qRT-PCR) technique has emerged as a powerful tool that serves to target specific pathways over a wide range of experimental conditions and estimated the modulations in gene expression patters with amazed sensitivity and accuracy (Asters et al. 2014; Kumar et al. 2015c).

Taken together, this work probes the atisine biosynthesis in A. heterophyllum for the first time and also explores the participating pathways with metabolic bottlenecks associated with atisine production by understanding the correlation of all concerned genes vis-à-vis target metabolite content.



Discussion

The goal of present study was to fill a gap in our knowledge of atisine biosynthesis and encoded genes. We have used the bio-retrobiosynthetic approach for formal interpretation of atisine biosynthesis pattern and integrated molecular layers to tap the detailed role of genes related to different feeder pathways for atisine biosynthesis in A. heterophyllum. Atisine biosynthesis involved seven interlinking metabolic processes, including glycolysis, phosphorylated, glycolate, glycerate, mevalonate, non-mevalonate and diterpene biosynthetic pathways. It is, however, clear that the dovetails of the genes to atisine biosynthesis remain murky.

This study has revealed the complete biosynthetic pathway of atisine along with candidate genes in A. heterophyllum for the first time. The expression analysis results of all the 25 selected genes showed modulated expression vis-à-vis atisine content in root and shoot tissues of A. heterophyllum. The atisine content showed 0–0.37 % increase in root compared to shoot tissue. The higher expression level of genes encoding G6PI (1.67-fold), PFK (1.75-fold), ALD (3.60-fold) and ENO (2.73-fold) enzymes of glycolysis in roots might indicate that these genes contribute to atisine biosynthesis by producing higher levels of precursors for connecting pathways, viz. mevalonate, non-mevalonate (MEP) and serine biosynthetic pathways leading to their activation (Kumar et al. 2015c; Munoz-Bertomeu et al. 2013). This was also supported by correlation analyses which showed significant positive correlations (p < 0.05; p < 0.01; p < 0.001) between shortlisted transcripts of glycolysis, serine biosynthesis and diterpene biosynthesis (Fig. 5). The combined effect of increased expression levels of G6PI, PFK and ALD would produce higher levels of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, the substrate for DXPS and GAPDH enzymes (Mutuku and Nose 2012). DXPS, which catalyzes the rate limiting step in MEP pathway, could produce higher levels of pathway intermediates resulting in the activation of MEP pathway (Broun and Somerville 2001). Malhotra et al. also showed the activation of MEP pathway in root tissue of A. heterophyllum known to produce higher levels of atisine. Stimulation of MEP pathway might be linked with the increased supply of GGPP, which is a precursor for the diterpene biosynthesis (Malhotra et al. 2014; Zhao et al. 2009). GAPDH, on the other hand, serves as the housekeeping gene and did not show significant alteration in expression in root and shoot tissues of A. heterophyllum. This might be indicative of glycolysis homeostasis irrespective of its flux towards non-mevalonate pathway. The expression of ENO gene showed noticeable increase (2.73-fold) in root over shoot tissue which might produce higher levels of PEP, the substrate for the enzyme DAHPS and PK. The supply of PEP is limiting for the shikimate pathway. Voll et al. observed that antisense inhibition of ENO enzyme hampered the plastidic shikimate pathway. It has been reported that shikimate/phenylpropanoid pathway is supposed to be the entry point into alkaloid biosynthesis via the formation of tyrosine (Tzin and Galili 2010). Our observations are also in agreement with another study which showed that total alkaloid content is higher in roots of high content accessions compared to low content accessions of A. heterophyllum (Malhotra et al. 2014). The expression of PK gene showed no significant modulation in root and shoot tissue which might indicate that higher concentrations of PEP is likely to be associated with enhanced allocation into shikimate/phenylpropanoid pathway but might also not affect the pyruvate production. This was further supported by correlation analysis results which represented that no significant positive correlation of ENO gene was found with other studied genes (Fig. 5). This observation implied that enhanced expression of ENO gene might be correlated with elevated total alkaloid biosynthesis in high content accessions but not affecting the biosynthesis of atisine through pyruvate homeostasis.Fig. 5Positively co-expressed network of shortlisted genes during atisine biosynthesis in roots of A. heterophyllum. In each metabolic pathway, shortlisted genes are boxed with different color and significant positive correlations between the gene expression levels are shown by connected lines. Abbreviations are elaborated in supplementary Table 4

Fig. 5

Positively co-expressed network of shortlisted genes during atisine biosynthesis in roots of A. heterophyllum. In each metabolic pathway, shortlisted genes are boxed with different color and significant positive correlations between the gene expression levels are shown by connected lines. Abbreviations are elaborated in supplementary Table 4

Further, serine biosynthesis is sensed via three pathways, including one that is related to photorespiration (glycolate pathway), others are nonphotorespiratory pathways but one requires phosphorylation (phosphorylated pathway), and one does not require phosphorylation (glycerate pathway) (Ros et al. 2014). It is thus tempting to identify the consensus route for serine production in A. heterophyllum roots. Our results indicated that only the genes encoding PGDH and PSAT enzymes in the phosphorylated pathway showed significant elevation in expression levels in root compared to shoot tissues. This might indicate that phosphorylated pathway plays a pivotal role inevitably over other pathways for serine production in root tissues of A. heterophyllum. Cascales-Minana et al. also showed that phosphorylated pathway is essential for root growth and has a major role in l-serine biosynthesis in non-photosynthetic tissues. Moreover, we also found highly significant positive correlation (p < 0.01) between PGDH of phosphorylated pathway and KO of diterpene biosynthetic pathway genes during their concomitant biosynthesis suggesting two parallel pathways for the production of atisine.

Interestingly, the demonstration of diterpene biosynthetic genes also revealed higher expression level of two genes, viz. KO (21.29-fold) and KH (2.16-fold) in roots which provide support to the involvement of steviol in the biosynthesis of atisine in our proposed atisine biosynthetic pathway. The role of KO and KH genes in atisine biosynthesis was further ascertained through their elevated expression levels in roots of high content accessions compared to low content accessions. This observation was in agreement with further evidence and supportive data of steviol quantification which showed 6.0-fold increase in roots of high content accessions compared to low content accessions. Surprisingly, we did not find any upstream gene of diterpene biosynthesis whose expression level is in congruence with atisine content. This might be theoretically explained by the fact that atisine biosynthesis bifurcated after ent-CPP formation and no information is available as of today for the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of atisine via atisenol route (Devkota and Sewald 2013). However, this might indicate that these genes may serve as the core factors in the control of atisine biosynthesis but unambiguously proved after the elucidation of unknown genes in the atisine biosynthetic pathway.

Taken together, the correlation approach used in the present study not only reinforced plausible atisine biosynthetic pathway but also provided a refined list of candidate genes which might regulate the atisine biosynthesis in A. heterophyllum. For multistep pathways, contemplated molecular switches are major undertakings which entails the metabolic engineering of pathways suffice to meet the increasing demands of desired secondary metabolites in target plant species. This study, thus, provides a platform for designing a suitable genetic intervention strategy to elevate the production of atisine in A. heterophyllum in the near future.
