
Abstract

Microsatellite markers containing simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are a valuable tool for genetic analysis. Date palm is a dioecious and slow flowering and is very difficult to identify the gender of the trees until it reaches the reproductive age (5–10 years). A total of 12 microsatellite primers were used with 30 date palm samples, 14 parents (8 male + 6 females) and 16 progeny (developed from parents breeding) which showed that microsatellites were highly polymorphic, having a great number of alleles. A total of 124 alleles were characterized in 12 SSR loci. On average, there are 9.08 alleles per locus, with a range from 5 to 16 alleles, for primers mpdCIR15 and mpdCIR57, respectively. These primers produced 15 polymorphic loci specifically in male date palm samples and the seedlings harboring the unique fragments were further characterized as male plants. Increasingly, 38.46 % of these loci were scored as homozygous alleles while 61.53 % heterozygous allelic loci were determined. Primer mpdCIR48 produced a specific locus (250/250) in all male samples whereas the same locus was absent in female samples. Similarly, a locus of 300/310 bp reoccurred in 5 date palm male samples using marker DP-168 which indicated that these are the promising candidate marker to detect the sex in date palm seedlings at early stage. The data resulted from combination of 12 primers enabled the 16 seedling samples progeny (developed from parents breeding) of date palm cultivars to divide into two groups i.e., male and female regarding their sex expression comparative to the parents (male + female) using the principle coordinate analysis.



Introduction

Date palm (2n = 36) is dioecious monocotyledonous belonging to Arecaceae family with 200 genera and 500 species (Dowson 1982). Phoenix is an important genus in the family which is most captivating (Munier 1973) as they exert great variation in their reproductive morphology, where single sex flowers are present on more than 85 % palms (Dransfield et al. 2008). In Pakistan, it is the 3rd major fruit crop after citrus and mango, and about 325 varieties of date palm are reported (Botes and Zaid 2002).

Sex determination at early stages of growth is very important to facilitate the breeding programs. It is hard to differentiate the date palm sex at early stages, so one cannot employ the genetic diversity programs until it reached reproductive stage (5–10 years) (Bendiab et al. 1993). As date palm is dioecious, sex chromosomes are observed in homomorphic form. An extra-heterochromatin present on the both arms of the male chromosomes is considered to be sex determinant (Siljak-Yakovlev et al. 1996). Historically, an improved breeding program is lacking due to presence of low genetic diversity as simple and perfect method for gender differentiation before first flowering was absent (Aberlenc-Bertossi et al. 2011). Date palm progenies contain equal proportion of male and female plants which has been directed to the hypothesis that sex is found genetically (Daher et al. 2010). The sex chromosomes existence in date palm on the basis of cytological studies was proposed with chromomycin staining, however, the genes associated with sex have not been determined Siljak-Yakovlev et al.. Similarly, the process of developmental stages that arrest the sterile sex organs has not been studied in detail. Using cytological and biochemical means, they concluded that there is no significant difference between male and female individuals and genetically its an important task to discriminate the sex agronomically in monoecious and dioecious species due to the longevity. Efforts have been made to understand the basic requirement of gender determination at early stage and use of the isozymes analysis (Torres and Tisserat 1980), peroxidases (Majourhat et al. 2002) and molecular marker tools with random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) (Moghaieb et al. 2010).

Biochemical studies give in a little information for sex identification of immature plants and gender specific DNA sequences offer a more capable and efficient method for gender determination (Qacif et al. 2007). Various efforts had been made to comprehend the genetic basis of sex evaluation of plants at early stages of development with molecular tools (Biffi et al. 1995; Hormaza et al. 1994). Asparagus, Mercurialis, Vitis and Spinacia are the well-documented examples in which sex identification was hindered due to the existence of additional factors and alleles that change the ultimate effect of sex determining genes (Durand and Durand 1990).

The recent techniques offer a new tool for genetic characterization and linkage maps construction with the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 28,889 EST sequences from the date palm genome database were analyzed to identify simplesequence repeats (SSRs) and to develop gene-based markers, i.e. expressed sequence tag-SSRs (EST-SSRs) (Zhao et al. 2013).

Arbitrary primers were used for the DNA template amplification in random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) technique (Welsh and McClelland 1990). Very effective studies have been made on numerous plant species for linkage and evolution studies (Halward et al. 1992; Carlson et al. 1991). RFLPs and RAPD markers are effectively used for molecular studies of date palm (Abdallah et al. 2000; Trifi et al. 2000) to discriminate the sex-specific DNA with different molecular techniques (RAPD and ISSR) for the collection and reformation of outstanding male pollen. Molecular breeding would accelerate genetic improvement of fruit tree through marker-assisted selection. However, the lack of molecular markers in date palm restricts the application of molecular breeding.

In this study, we have identified the sex-specific DNA markers for date palm cultivars using microsatellites. Such a technique will not only facilitate the screening of gender at early developmental stage but also could be most important for speeding up breeding and, thereby, saving of time, cost and other resources.


