
Abstract

Tuberculosis (TB) remains as one of the deadliest diseases after HIV globally with 95 % of deaths confined to low-and-middle income countries. Pakistan is fifth among the 22 high-burden TB countries with the incidence rate of 230/100,000 persons, however, studies related to prevalent Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains and their spread, drug resistance pattern and evolutionary genetics are inadequate. The present study was undertaken to highlight the circulation of M. tuberculosis strains causing drug resistant TB in our community by targeting the molecular marker IS6110 and then characterization of these strains as Beijing and Non-Beijing genotypes. Sputum samples from 102 MDR TB suspects from different cities of Punjab were collected and their record was stored in a database. Sputum samples were evaluated by Ziehl Neelson staining and cultured on Lownstein Jensen medium by Modified Petroff’s method. DST was performed for first-line anti-mycobacterial drugs by indirect proportion method. Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates were investigated for the presence of IS6110 and further identification as Beijing, Non-Beijing or mixed genotype. Percentage of male and female patients was found to be 58.8 and 41.2 % respectively. DST showed resistance of 93 % of isolates to isoniazid and rifampicin. All of the isolates showed positive results for IS6110 amplification. Based on PCR amplification of Beijing and non-Beijing primer sets 4.9 % of the patients showed infection with pure Beijing isolates, 14.7 % with both Beijing and non-Beijing isolates and 80.3 % with pure non-Beijing isolates. Analysis of IS6110 and Beijing sequences showed the presence of putative transposase conserved domain while non-Beijing sequences were epitomized with RAMP_I_III superfamily domain (CRISPR-associated protein family). TB in Pakistan is predominantly caused by Non-Beijing genotypes, but Beijing strains showed incessant circulation in our community as both single and mixed (co-infecting Non-Beijing and Beijing) strains.



Introduction

Tuberculosis (TB) continues as one of the deadliest contagious diseases across the globe. Nearly 9 million people developed TB in 2013 and the year ended with the demise of 1.5 million people due to TB. Of the total TB cases and deaths, around 56.25 % are men but the burden of the disease is eminent in women as well. To no surprise, out of the total TB cases occurred in 2014, 58 % belonged to the South-east Asian and Western Pacific regions (WHO 2015).

Pakistan stands fifth among the 22 high-burden countries and fourth among 27 MDR-TB countries. Nearly 420,000 cases occur each year out of 9000 cases are of DR-TB. Socio-economic conditions are greatly influenced by TB as 75 % of cases are among the dynamic (15–45) age group (Programme NTC 2012). TB is closely associated to poverty and social deprivation (Lönnroth et al. 2009). Poor living conditions like overcrowding, poor ventilation, close proximity and malnutrition are the major risk factors for contracting TB infection and disease. Lack of awareness to TB epidemiology, management and control in TB endemic areas worsens the situation (Narasimhan et al. 2013).

Furthermore, the rapid increase in the incidence of MDR-and XDR-TB complicated the issue. MDR, resistance to at least 2 most potent first line drugs (rifampicin and isoniazid) while extensive drug resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB) is defined as MTB strains resistant to first line drugs and also resistant to any fluoroquinolone and at least one of the three second line injectable drugs: kanamycin (KAN), amikacin (AMK), and capreomycin (CAP) (Hamilton et al. 2007).

The timely and accurate diagnosis of drug resistant TB is utmost important for suitable intervention to halt the disease progression. It also facilitates to halt the transmission of MDR and XDR-TB strains (Lange et al. 2014). Drug susceptibility testing of MTB contains two folds importance. One patient infected with resistant bacilli can achieve a favorable response after DST results if treatment is adjusted after his DST pattern. Secondly DST results will be useful to monitor the National TB control programs efforts (Thomsen et al. 2000). Although the traditional DST has high sensitivity and specificity, it is time-consuming (6–9 weeks) which demands for rapid drug resistance detection assays.

Molecular diagnostic tools have provided the solution to this problem. Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) are based on the identification and amplification of nucleic acids’ sequences that are highly specific to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Drobniewski et al. 2012).

Insertion sequences are small mobile elements which are proved to be present in various bacterial genomes. IS6110 is one of the IS elements which are intensively studied and reported to be specific to M. tuberculosis complex genome. IS6110 is present in multiple copies within the M. tuberculosis genome which makes it an important epidemiological tool for strain identification (Menéndez et al. 2014; Siddiqui et al. 2013). The capacity to differentiate between the strains depends on the variation in copy number as well as the insertion sites of IS6110 (Thorne et al. 2011).

Molecular epidemiological studies of tuberculosis are worthwhile in understanding the transmission and geographical pattern of drug resistant strains. Such studies have discovered multiple mycobacterial lineages worldwide (Filliol et al. 2002). Drug resistance patterns shown by genotypes of M. tuberculosis vary globally. Resistance pattern showed by Beijing genotype is different region-wise (Glynn et al. 2002); however, this genotype has been largely reported to be related to DR-TB outbreaks in Africa, Asia and Europe (Johnson et al. 2010; Niemann et al. 2010). Beijing genotype has been shown to be associated with MDR-TB incidence in Pakistan (Tanveer et al. 2008).

Infection and recurrence of TB have been believed to be caused by primary infection or reactivation of single strain for decades (Zheng et al. 2015). However, research in the field of molecular epidemiology has revealed the term mixed infection of multiple strains among single individuals and has got prime importance among researchers and TB Control programs (Zetola et al. 2014). Mixed Infection can enhance the ability of MTB strains to acquire additional mutations and increase the rate of treatment failure (Cohen et al. 2012).

By amplifying and detecting the DNA sequences of Beijing and Non-Beijing strains, it has been observed that many retreatment cases contain multiple strains. It has been extensively studied that the region Rv2819 and part of Rv2820 in M. tuberculosis genome is specifically deleted in all Beijing strains, while it is present in Non-Beijing strains (Khosravi et al. 2014).

As mixed infection may be particularly common in high burden drug resistant TB countries, so the aim of the present study was to elucidate the drug resistant pattern of multi-drug resistant MTB strains in our community, genotypic identification and detection of mixed infection of Beijing and non-Beijing strains in Pakistan and its prevalence in new and retreatment cases on the basis of deleted and intact genetic regions in Beijing and Non-Beijing strains of M. tuberculosis respectively.


