
Abstract

We conducted a study for enhanced biological rehabilitation of chromium-contaminated soils using a chromium-reducing and nitrogen-fixing bacterial species (Bacillus megaterium-ASNF3). The bacterial species was isolated from a chromium-rich land area, characterized, and employed under optimum conditions for the treatment of artificially prepared chromium-rich soil. The bacterium reduced Cr(VI) up to 86 % in a 60-day trial of incubation in the soil bioreactor. The nitrogenase activity of the bacterium yielded up to 486 nmol of ethylene/mL/h after an incubation period of 40 days when it was optimally cultured in growth medium at neutral pH and 30 °C. Although the nitrogen-fixing ability of the bacterium reduced significantly in the presence of 1000 ppm of Cr(VI), yet, the bacterium was proved to be a potential bio-fertilizer for enhancing nitrogen contents of the contaminated soil even under the higher chromium stress, together with the metal reduction. In the biologically treated soil, higher values of wheat growth variables were achieved. Application of metal-resistant B. megaterium-ASNF3 in selected situations rendered chromium-laden soils arable with significant increment in crop-yield parameters.



Introduction

Industrial activities and sewage sludge depositions have largely contributed to the spread of toxic metals in terrestrial and aquatic environments. The long-term depositions of metal-loaded effluents have transformed fertile land areas into non-arable lands. Agricultural activities on such lands would result in bioaccumulation of toxic metals in food chain (Lu et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2013). Wide industrial applications of Cr in textile, leather tanning, metal finishing, and inorganic chemicals’ manufacturing result into discharges of Cr-loaded effluents into the environment. The environmental and public health concerns have made the metal contaminations a highly attention seeking problem (Zayed and Terry 2003).

Stable and, thus, commonly occurring oxidation states of Cr are trivalent Cr(III) and hexavalent Cr(VI) species (Kotas and Stasicka 2000). Cr(VI) is the most toxic one, because it has a high oxidizing potential, solubility, and mobility across membranes in the living organisms and through the environment (Azmat and Javed 2011). The carcinogenic and mutagenic effects of Cr(VI) to all forms of life are well known (Dong et al. 2007; Peralta-Videa et al. 2009). While Cr(III) being water-insoluble is much less toxic and usually precipitates as hydroxides (Shanker et al. 2005; Gheju et al. 2009). Cr contaminations mostly rise in urban lands where industrial effluents and wastewaters are applied for irrigation purposes and pose serious challenges regarding toxicity to vegetation growing on it and ultimately to the consumers of that vegetation (Shanker et al. 2005; López-Luna et al. 2009; Mushtaq and Khan 2010).

The most widely used method for the removal of metal ions is chemical neutralization. Given that this method is expensive and can possibly create generation of secondary pollutants, its application can be problematic (Ihsanullah et al. 2016). Owing to high efficacy and low operational cost, the bioremedial strategies have been advocated, including studies based on the utilization of genetic potential of microorganisms, originally isolated from the contaminated environment (Thacker et al. 2006; Cetin et al. 2008; Martins et al. 2010; Hussain and Qazi 2016). The line of action has high likelihood of isolating microbial cultures which can successfully be augmented for remediating the contamination.

Different ex situ bioremediation efforts while amending the contaminated soils with organic-rich contents and/or bacterial inoculations have shown promising results (Jeyasingh and Philip 2005; Khan et al. 2010). With a comparable objective, the present study was designed to isolate a bacterium having the potential to fix N and reduce Cr simultaneously, from highly Cr-contaminated soil and to employ the bacterial species for enhanced and improved agro-rehabilitation of Cr-stressed soil.


