


Introduction

Submerged cultivation of various filamentous ascomycetes is ubiquitous, widespread and used to produce broad-spectrum antimicrobial metabolite, commercially (Papagianni 2004). Nutrient source is a cognitive factor of growth and germination of filamentous fungi (Shah and Tariq 2005). Nutrients exploited in biosynthesis and ATP dependent energy release, assists as fundamental drift towards the viability, survival and sustenance of any organism (Safavi et al. 2007). For commercial cultivation of microorganism, it is imperative to have an in-depth knowledge of their nutritional requirements. The macroelements such as carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, potassium, magnesium, calcium and phosphorus are integral components of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic acids and these metabolically active groups are directly/indirectly involved in host-pathogen interaction and self-defense and perpetuation mechanisms. Carbon is required as the skeletal element of all organic molecules, and molecules serving as carbon sources normally also contribute both oxygen and hydrogen. Gao et al. studied the effect of different C/N ratio on the growth and sporulation of several biocontrol agents. Mg2+ ion is widely perceived as an essential element for fungal growth and its biochemical functions (Jasper and Silver 1977) involved in a major way through transducing and the control of cell division in many filamentous ascomycetes through its control of microtubule assembly (Walker 1978). It has also been reported that passage of the Mg2+ and Ca2+ ions through the plasma membrane shows many of the characteristics of an active transport system with K+ ion which extruded to preserve electrical neutrality. The CN ratio is said to significantly affect the number of conidia produced and conidial characteristics as well as on growth, sporulation and biocontrol efficacy (Jackson and Bothast 1990; Jackson and Schisler 1992; Jackson and Slininger 1993; Engelkes et al. 1997). This study on variable nutrient source had been conducted so as to evaluate the fungi for their conidial germination, mycelial growth and sporulating potential on differential media containing various carbon and nitrogen sources and ratios. The culture media which supports better germination growth and sporulation promises to the key to the effective, low cost development of antifungal protein in submerged fermentation. Simple and less expensive media are, therefore, needed to permit their mass-production and commercialization (Liu and Chen 2002; Shah and Tariq 2005). In the conventional approach, an optimization process usually involves one factor at a time (OFAT) (Nandal et al. 2013; Mehta et al. 2016). Conventional optimization procedures such as RSM (response surface methodology) procedures are time consuming, cumbersome, require more experimental data sets and cannot provide information about the mutual interactions of the parameters (Aggarwal et al. 2008). Taguchi design of experiments (DOE) developed by Genichi Taguchi to improve the quality of manufactured goods (Taguchi 1986) has been appreciated in many biotechnology and bioprocess engineering (Ross 1996; Roy 2001) possesses many advantages, includes efficient and logical plan for performing experiments under the consideration of the interactive effects among the control factors.

In this study, we examined and discussed the effects of six most decisive factors viz; soluble starch, corn steep liquor with proteose peptone, K2HPO4, CaCl2, MgSO4 and NaCl at their assigned ratio on nutrient dynamics, cell morphology and afp production in submerged fermentation of Aspergillus giganteus MTCC 8408. Taguchi DOE was employed with L8 OA for enhanced afp production. The aim of this work was also to establish minimum levels for Mg2+ in growth medium and to determine whether Ca2+ and Na+ could act as a growth inhibitor through competition with Mg2+.


