


Introduction

Microorganisms dwelling in extreme environments are prolific producers of several bioactive compounds that have evolved due to adaptation of the extreme environmental conditions in terms of metabolic biochemistry. Actinomycetes are well documented for their capacity to produce bioactive metabolites with complex diversity and diverse biological activities. The genes involved in the synthesis of secondary metabolites remain undiscovered due to absence of transcription under conventional laboratory conditions, but mathematical models predict thousands of unexplored secondary metabolites from actinomycete genomes. Actinomycetes are stable, persistent, and active component of the marine microbial communities. Discovery of novel actinobacteria, which operate unusual metabolic pathways, has the ability to produce complex chemical compounds with potential biological activities.

Optimization of physiological parameters and the supplementary nutrition for the biosynthesis of bioactive metabolites can be achieved by the systemic study. The important parameters such as cultural conditions and media constituents are the significant factors influencing the high yield of antimicrobial compounds. Often the production conditions are very similar among the closely related actinomycetes, and hence, optimization of growth and production conditions is very crucial for the maximum production of potential bioactive compounds (Pfefferle et al. 2000; Kiranmayi et al. 2011). Media optimization explores a sequence of phases with specific set of optimal conditions fixed by different methodologies (Shekar et al. 2014).

Traditional one-factor-at-time (OFAT) optimization is laborious and time-consuming, and also misleading conclusions may be drawn, because individual factor interactions are ignored. Hence, establishing the optimized conditions is cumbersome, and therefore, cultural conditions need to be optimized to maximize the production of bioactive compounds with preserved biological activities (Ilaiyaraja et al. 2015). Statistical optimization approach is advantageous than to the traditional practice of changing one variable at a time (Collaa et al. 2016). Response surface methodology (RSM) quantifies the relationship between the controllable input parameters and obtained response. RSM is a powerful statistical experimental approach used in mathematical modeling, and an ideal process for variable standardizing strategy for optimization of the target metabolite production and simultaneously evaluates the relative significance and interactive effects among different variables (Souagui et al. 2015). Central composite design (CCD) is a program of RSM that is embedded with factorial or fractional factorial design with center points that are augmented with a group of “star points” that allows estimation of curvature.

Furthermore, the successful design and operation of fermentation process, in which biochemical transformation occurs in controlled conditions, need careful understanding of complex metabolic reactions. This could be supported by mathematical modeling that describes the process simpler with good representation. Fermentation kinetic models allow the bioengineer to get insight and deep knowledge on the mechanism of synthesis of bioactive metabolites for its yield and productivity from fermentation studies. Furthermore, the evaluation of assumed unstructured models with the experimental data for comparison to find the best model that describes the system. In general, unstructured models consider the cell mass as a whole to explain the biological system and are more effective in elucidating the fermentation profiles of microbial process as for bio products (Rajendran and Thangavelu 2008; Rama Krishna et al. 2016).

Hence, the objectives of this study include the statistical optimization of process parameters for bioactive metabolite production using RSM and to estimate the kinetic parameters of actinomycetes fermentation using N. litoralis strain VSM 8 (KT901293).


