
Abstract

This study elaborates the consequences of oxidative stress caused by copper oxide (CuO) and titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles (NPs) in Brassica juncea. Effect of these two NPs on plant physiology, reactive oxygen scavenging enzyme system (ascorbate peroxidase, catalase, superoxide dismutase), proline content and lipid peroxidation has been estimated in leaves as well as root tissues. Bioaccumulation of NPs has also been evaluated in the current study and the interrelated cascade of the enzymatic system with H2O2 production was identified. The uptake of NPs in plant leaves was confirmed by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, and Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy. Plant growth was found to be diminished with elevated levels of CuO NPs whereas TiO2 NPs had shown an opposite effect. The plant species accumulated lower concentration of NPs and displayed considerable tolerance against stress, probably due to well-organized and coordinated defense system at the root and shoot level by the intonation of antioxidative enzymes.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0550-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Nanoparticles have received a tremendous attention for their optimistic impact in many sectors of research and development. In particular, CuO NPs are being used and marketed as antifouling paints for boats, commonly utilized by ink, plastic, ceramic, electronic and chemical industries (Cioffi et al. 2005; Saison et al. 2010; Pan et al. 2010). Similarly, TiO2 NPs are used in medicinal formulations due to germicidal and antimicrobial properties. It is also well-known for making corrosion-proof surfaces of metals (Wold 1993; Ellsworth et al. 2000). The ongoing production and application of metal oxide NPs have increased, due to which possibility of exposure to plants via aerial or root path has been elevated. Once adsorbed to plant surfaces, exact behavior of the NPs inside plant system is still not well-explored because different NPs can lead to either positive or negative effects on the plant system. Toxic response of NPs has been induced by changes in the plant metabolism (Limbach et al. 2007). Retardation in growth and other harmful effects on plants could be correlated with the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the plant system which results into oxidative stress. Plants may respond to oxidative stress by enzymatic ROS scavenging systems including ascorbate peroxidase (APX), catalase (CAT), and superoxide dismutase (SOD). Among ROS compounds, H2O2 is the central hub of various reactions within a plant system and has a relatively long half-life (1 ms) and its small size allows traversing through cellular membranes and migration in different compartments, which facilitates its signaling functions (Bienert et al. 2006).

In future more studies focusing on bioaccumulation, biomagnifications and biotransformation of NPs in plant species are required (Rico et al. 2011). Till date, scanty information is available on the interaction of plant species with respect to the accumulation and subsequent availability of NPs in food crops. For the terrestrial plants, uptake of CuO NPs by wheat and toxicity of these NPs to ryegrass, radish has been reported (Zhou et al. 2006; Atha et al. 2012). Another report has shown that TiO2 NPs could have a positive effect on the growth of spinach (Tripathi et al. 2016). Likewise, a mixture of nanoscale SiO2 and TiO2 could speed up the germination and growth in soybean (Lu et al. 2002). Phytotoxicity of NPs on plants was reported in cabbage, carrot, radish, rape, and rye grass (Yang and Watts 2005; Lin and Xing 2007). On the other hand, application of TiO2 (size 25 and 100 nm) to willow plant cuttings did not show any significant toxic effects. Furthermore, it was observed that amount of aggregate formation and sedimentation was higher with the increasing particle sizes (Seeger et al. 2009).

To the best of our knowledge, so far no study has been done to investigate the role of antioxidant enzymes against NPs. This study is a dedicated attempt in this direction to investigate the oxidative stress in Brassica juncea induced by two different metal oxide nanoparticles. For this purpose a hydroponic system has been used to examine the accumulation and uptake of NPs by B. juncea. Additional, study dealing with generation of oxidative stress due to CuO and TiO2 NPs in comparison to H2O2 content has been performed and an interrelated cascade of the enzymatic system with H2O2 production was identified. Evaluation of the toxic effect of these nanomaterials will not only help to ensure the safety of their wide range of applications, but will also be useful in designing a functional materials with minimal adverse effects to plants and ecosystem.


