
Abstract

l-Asparaginase is a chemotherapeutic drug used in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), a malignant disorder in children. l-Asparaginase helps in removing acrylamide found in fried and baked foods that is carcinogenic in nature. l-Asparaginase is present in plants, animals and microbes. Various microorganisms such as bacteria, yeast and fungi are generally used for the production of l-asparaginase as it is difficult to obtain the same from plants and animals. l-Asparaginase from bacteria causes anaphylaxis and other abnormal sensitive reactions due to low specificity to asparagine. Toxicity and repression caused by bacterial l-asparaginase shifted focus to eukaryotic microorganisms such as fungi to improve the efficacy of l-asparaginase. Clinically available l-asparaginase has glutaminase and urease that may lead to side effects during treatment of ALL. Current work tested 45 fungal strains isolated from soil and agricultural residues. Isolated fungi were tested using conventional plate assay method with two indicator dyes, phenol red and bromothymol blue (BTB), and results were compared. l-Asparaginase activity was measured by cultivating in modified Czapek–Dox medium. Four strains have shown positive result for l-asparaginase production with no urease or glutaminase activity, among these C7 has high enzyme index of 1.57 and l-asparaginase activity of 33.59 U/mL. l-Asparaginase production by C7 was higher with glucose as carbon source and asparagine as nitrogen source. This is the first report focussing on fungi that can synthesize l-asparaginase of the desired specificity. Since the clinical toxicity of l-asparaginase is attributed to glutaminase and urease activity, available evidence indicates variants negative for glutaminase and urease would provide higher therapeutic index than variants positive for glutaminase and urease.



Introduction

l-Asparaginase is an amidohydrolase that catalyses l-asparagine to l-aspartate and ammonia. l-Asparaginase is found to have tumour inhibitory properties. It is mainly used in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). Normal cells can synthesize l-asparagine with the help of asparagine synthetase, whereas certain sensitive malignant cells cannot synthesize it by itself and require an external source of l-asparagine for growth. During the treatment of ALL with l-asparaginase, all the circulating asparagine in the body of the patient get hydrolysed to aspartic acid and ammonia preventing the absorption of asparagine by tumour cells thereby depriving the tumour cells of their extracellular source of l-asparagine (Broome 1961). L-Asparaginase is commonly used as a combination chemotherapy drug for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) in adults and children and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in children (Mashburn and Wriston 1964). l-Asparaginase also reduces acrylamide formation in food by selectively hydrolysing asparagine to aspartic acid and ammonia without affecting other amino acids, retaining food quality. Application of l-asparaginase enzyme (2 U/g) successfully reduced acrylamide content by 90 % in potato products that have high asparagine content (Friedman 2003; Ciesarová et al. 2006).

l-Asparaginase is widely present in plants, animals and microbes but not in humans. Microbes are a better source for the production of enzyme as they are easy to cultivate and manipulate (Kumar and Sobha 2012). Clinically three asparaginase formulations are available, two from bacterial sources Escherichia coli (E. coli asparaginase) and Erwinia chrysanthemi (Erwinia asparaginase) and PEGylated form of E. coli asparaginase. L-Asparaginase therapy has side effects such as anaphylaxis, coagulation abnormality, thrombosis, liver dysfunction, pancreatitis, hyperglycaemia and cerebral dysfunction, etc.These side effects are either due to the production of anti-asparaginase antibody in the body or l-glutaminase activity of l-asparaginase enzyme (Haskell et al. 1969; Mahajan et al. 2012). Toxicity of l-asparaginase is mainly due to the fact that the enzyme preparations are amidohydrolase, not l-asparaginase. Clinically available l-asparaginase shows notable hydrolysis of l-glutamine and d-asparagine, signifying multiple enzyme activities contaminating enzyme preparation and difficult to eliminate other enzymes (Campbell and Mashburn 1969). Notwithstanding numerous studies on bacterial l-asparaginase, treatment with it sometimes results in hypersensitive reactions such as anaphylactic shock. l-Asparaginase isolated from filamentous fungi, Aspergillus terreus showed a greater carcinostatic effect on static tumour (De-Angeli et al. 1970). Similar effect was observed when l-asparaginase from deuteromycetes Fusarium tricinctum was purified which regressed lymphosarcoma in mice (Scheetz et al. 1971). Later purified extracellular l-asparaginase from A. terreus was conjugated with polyethylene glycol and it did not indicate any glutaminase activity (Loureiro 2012). Sarquis et al. examined Aspergillus tamari and A. terreus for l-asparaginase production and found that asparaginase activity is reduced in the presence of urea and glutamine (Sarquis et al. 2004). On the other hand, Bano and Sivaramakrishnan discovered that purified l-asparaginase from green chillies showed presence of glutaminase and urease. Further studies revealed that urease is present in E. coli enzyme preparation, which may result in toxic effects by hydrolysis of blood urea (Bano and Sivaramakrishnan 1980). Manna et al. produced and purified l-asparaginase from Pseudomonas stutzeri MB-405 which showed high specificity towards asparagine but did not hydrolyze glutamine, also asparaginase activity was lacking at 2 M urea (Manna et al. 1995). Therefore, current study is an effort to isolate fungi that can produce asparaginase free of glutaminase and urease. This process involves isolation of fungi from soil and agricultural residue for extracellular synthesis of l-asparaginase.


