
Abstract

A gram-negative, rod-shaped, isoproturon (IPU) utilizing bacterium was isolated from herbicide-applied wheat fields of Tarai agro-ecosystem, Pantnagar. The phylogenetic sequence analysis based on 16S rRNA sequence revealed that the isolate could be a distinct species within the genus Pseudomonas. The isolate was a close relative of Pseudoxanthomonas japonensis (95 % similarity) and designated as K2. The bacterial isolate showed positive reaction for oxidase, catalase, and 20 carbohydrates using KB009 Part A and B HiCarbohydrate™ Kit. Degradation experiments were conducted using 200 mg l−1 initial IPU as a source of carbon at different pH and temperatures. Maximum IPU degradation by K2 was observed at pH 7.0 and 30 °C, while least degradation at 6.5 pH and 25 °C. Addition of dextrose along with IPU as an auxiliary carbon source increased IPU degradation by 4.72 %, as compared to the IPU degradation without dextrose under optimum conditions. 4-isopropylaniline was detected as a degradation by-product in the medium. The present study demonstrated the IPU metabolizing capacity of a novel bacterial isolate K2 that can be a better choice for the remediation of IPU-contaminated sites.



Introduction

Isoproturon is an extensively used phenylurea herbicides for control of pre- or post-emergence broad-leaved weeds in cotton, fruits and cereal production. (Sorensen et al. 2003). Ecotoxicological data indicate that IPU and its by-products are harmful to aquatic environments (Widenfalk et al. 2008; Vallotton et al. 2009), and carcinogenic to humans and animals (Hoshiya et al. 1993; Behera and Bhunya 1990). Moreover, extensive use of IPU has been considered as a severe water pollution threat near agricultural catchments in various parts of the world, exceeding the 0.1 µg l−1 limits of European Commission (Spliid and Koppen 1998; Muller et al. 2002). Therefore, the use of IPU has been banned or severely restricted in some countries since 2003; however, it is still being used as a potent herbicide in several countries, including India.

Microbial degradation of pesticides in the environment is a reliable, cost effective and eco-friendly remediation technique (Hussain et al. 2011). A variety of IPU degrading soil micro-flora has been recently isolated from contaminated sites in various parts of the world (Badawi et al. 2009; Hussain et al. 2009; Sun et al. 2009). Fortunately, Sphingomonas sp., Methylopila sp., Sphingobium sp. and Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain JS-11 were found promising for complete IPU mineralization (Sorensen et al. 2001; El-Sebai et al. 2004; Sun et al. 2009; Dwivedi et al. 2011). Interestingly, addition of auxiliary carbon source in the medium or pesticide contaminated sites can stimulate microbial growth and significantly enhance the degradation rates of complex organic pollutants (Scow and Hicks 2005). Biostimulation involves the addition of adequate nutrients in the medium to enhance pesticide degradation potential of native microbes (Couto et al. 2010) or to promote cometabolism (De Lorenzo 2008). Biostimulation is one of the major strategies, which has been implemented for the bioremediation of a wide variety of xenobiotics (Kadian et al. 2008; Giri et al. 2015). Although the microbial communities existing in contaminated sites harbour the pesticide catabolising genes and enzymes, lack of electron acceptors or donors, nutrient availability or delayed stimulation of the metabolic pathways essential for degradation acts as limiting factors for pesticide degradation. Under such circumstances, addition of supplementary nutrients or readily available carbon source enhances the degradation of the toxic materials (Cosgrove et al. 2010; Kanissery and Sims 2011).

Uttarakhand, the 27th state of India, is an agrarian state with three-fourth of its total population depending on agriculture. Tarai agro-ecosystem is the major food production zone of Uttarakhand; therefore, pesticide application is also high in this region. Heavy pesticide application poses deleterious effect on non-target beneficial microorganisms, humans and other life forms. Further, ground and surface water contamination, and development of pesticide resistance are some major risks associated with pesticide use. An official survey conducted by Government of India in 2005–06 and 2009–10 indicates that IPU is among the most consumed pesticide in the country (http://www.pesticideinfo.org, retrieved on 24.06.2015 at 9.55 am).

In view of the facts described above, the present investigation aimed to test the IPU degradation potential of a native bacterial isolate that was recovered from IPU-contaminated field.


