
Abstract

Phosphorus (P) is a vital nutrient for plant growth and development, and is absorbed in cells with the help of membrane-spanning inorganic phosphate transporter (Pht) protein. Symbiosis with arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) also helps in transporting P from the soil to plant and Pht proteins play an important role in it. To understand this phenomenon in Finger Mille plant, we have cloned four Pht genes from Finger millet, which shares the homology with Pht1 protein family of cereals. Expression pattern analysis during the AM infection indicated that EcPT4 gene was AM specific, and its expression was higher in roots where AM colonization percentage was high. The expression level of EcPT1-4 gene under the phosphorous (Pi) stress in seedlings was found to be consistent with its role in acquisition of phosphorus. Homology study of the EcPt proteins with Pht proteins of cereals shows close relationship. The findings of the study indicate that Pht1 family genes from finger millet can serve to be an important resource for the better understanding of phosphorus use efficiency.



Introduction

Finger millet (Eleusine coracana L.) is grown in many parts of the world with a wide range of environmental conditions. Its production ranks sixth in India after wheat, rice, maize, sorghum and pearl millet. It is a good source of mineral nutrients like calcium, phosphorus and also provides amino acids like lysine and methionine for the peoples from Asian and African regions (Dida et al. 2008). The grains are being used for preparation of traditional foods, such as roti (bread), mudde (dumpling) and ambali (thin porridge). It shows antimicrobial, antioxidant and anti-diabetic properties because of the presence of polyphenols in seeds of this millet (Devi et al. 2014). It is the main food grain for many peoples, especially in areas with soil having poor nutrient level (Kumar et al. 2016; Upadhyaya et al. 2007).

Along with other nutrient, phosphorus (Pi) is one of the essential mineral nutrients for proper growth and development of plant. Being a structural component of nucleic acids and phospholipids, it plays an important role in biological processes like photosynthesis, energy transfer reactions, and signal transduction (Li et al. 2010; Versaw and Harrison 2002). The phosphorus is abundantly present in the soil but not in readily available form due to its high fixation rate in the soil. This is a worldwide problem and a limiting factor in agriculture production (Sánchez-Calderón et al. 2010); as 70% of the global cultivated land, including acidic and alkaline calcareous soils, suffers from inorganic phosphate (Pi) deficiency, making Pi nutrition a research area of great priority (Lopez-Arredondo et al. 2014). With the increasing demand for food (http://faostat.fao.org/), the uncontrolled fertilization has given rise to many environmental problems. Hence, developing the eco-friendly technologies for effective use of P under P-limited conditions will be of major importance for agricultural sustainability. The plants acquire phosphorus from the soil solution either directly via absorption by roots or indirectly through a mycorrhizal symbiosis (Richardson 2001; Walder et al. 2015). The past studies have indicated the presence of a mineral transport system in plants that consist of membrane-spanning phosphate transporter family proteins (Pht1 family). The members of this gene family are identified from various plants like Arabidopsis thaliana (Bayle et al. 2011; Remy et al. 2012), rice (Ai et al. 2009; Campos-Soriano et al. 2012; Sun et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2013), wheat (Davies et al. 2002; Duan et al. 2015; Guo et al. 2014), tomato (Chen et al. 2014; Liu et al. 1998a), tobacco (Tan et al. 2012), maize (Nagy et al. 2006; Su et al. 2014), barley (Schünmann et al. 2004), Medicago truncatula (Javot et al. 2007; Liu et al. 1998b), Populus trichocarpa (Loth-Pereda et al. 2011), and soybean (Inoue et al. 2014; Song et al. 2014).

In our previous study, we have found that some genotypes of finger millet showed differential response in term of growth and yield in the presence of mycorrhizal symbiosis (Unpublished data). This differential response may be due to different genetic factors involved in better establishment of AMF symbiosis. Mainly, the phosphate transporter genes from root have been reported to be involved in nutrient exchange during symbiosis with AMF (Walder et al. 2015). With objective for better understanding of mechanism of phosphate uptake in finger millet, we cloned phosphate transporter genes and studied their expression pattern in association with AMF and in phosphorus stress condition.



Discussion

Based on the sequence of rice phosphate transporter genes, two complete and two partial phosphate transporter genes were cloned from finger millet. Compared with conserved domain database at NCBI (Marchler-Bauer et al. 2011), it was found that Pht1 family members of finger millet contain the characteristic domains specific to the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS) protein family which is a major class of membrane proteins (Abramson et al. 2003). The genes cloned in this study also showed conserved multi-domains of phosphate uptake transporter subfamily of the MFS (Marchler-Bauer et al. 2011), and this indicates that the cloned genes were members of phosphate transporter protein family. The phylogenetic tree analysis showed that EcPT genes showed homology with PT genes of rice and maize (Fig. 5), where EcPT-1 and 2 were found in the group of OsPT- 1, 2, 3, and GRMZM2G070087, while EcPT3 was found along with OsPT- 8, 12, GRMZM2G326707, and GRMZM2G154090. EcPT4 showed closeness to OsPT 11 and GRMZM5G881088, and interestingly OsPT11 has reported to be mycorrhiza specific (Paszkowski et al. 2002). The same results were found in our study, which confirm that physiological processes involved in AMF- plant symbiosis seem to be conserved during the process of evolution. The presence of conserved domains in EcPT and OsPT protein showed that the proteins are monocot specific and might have evolved from their common ancestors. The molecular structure of EcPT protein resembles the molecular structure of eukaryotic phosphate transporter protein. This signifies that these proteins are evolved for common functionalities of phosphate transportation in plant lineage.

We investigated root colonization, and transcription of genes EcPT1-4 after inoculation with G. intraradices and Pi stress in finger millet. From the results, it was clear that the rate of colonization by mycorrhiza was variety specific and some varieties of finger millet are more responsive to mycorrhiza infection (Unpublished data). Also, the increase in root colonization was related with the increased expression of phosphate transporter genes cloned in this study. The previous studies have supported our findings that AM can increase the phosphate transport in plants by increasing the activity of host phosphate transporter genes (Nagy et al. 2005; Tan et al. 2012).

During the expression study, a change in the expressions of EcPT1-4 was detected in three different varieties of finger millet with AMF infection. EcPT4 did not express in leaves and roots of non-mycorrhizal seedlings of all three varieties, but only expressed in roots infected with AM. Under the Pi stress also we were unable to detect its transcript in Ragi Korchara Local. Previous studies have shown that in plants some of the PT genes are induced by AM colonization in roots (Karandashov et al. 2004; Nagy et al. 2005; Paszkowski et al. 2002; Siciliano et al. 2007; Tan et al. 2012; Wegmuller et al. 2008). The results of our transcript abundance study indicated that EcPT4 was mycorrhiza-specific finger millet phosphate transporter gene and expressed with inoculation of with G. intraradices.

The finger millet seedlings grown in the liquid nutrient media with lower P concentrations have shown a different expression pattern of phosphate transporter genes. The variable rate of transcript abundance may be due to various factors like promoter controlling the responsiveness to Pi stress (Liu et al. 1998a). Results of the expression in leaves in all three varieties indicated that various genetic and spatial factors influence phosphate transporter activity during the plant P uptake (Inoue et al. 2014). These results suggested that the cloned genes might be involved in diverse processes along with the direct uptake pathway of P by membrane-spanning phosphate transporters (Bayle et al. 2011; Inoue et al. 2014).
