
Abstract

The enhancement of plant secondary metabolite production in cell suspension cultures through biotic or abiotic elicitation has become a potential biotechnological approach for commercialization or large-scale production of bioactive compounds. Gymnema sylvestre R.Br. is an important medicinal plant, rich in a group of oleanane triterpenoid saponins called gymnemic acid, well known for its anti-diabetic activity. Two endophytic fungal strains were isolated from the leaves of G. sylvestre and identified as Polyancora globosa and Xylaria sp. based on the PCR amplification and internal transcribed spacer (ITS 1-5.8S-ITS 2) sequencing of 18S rRNA gene. The process of elicitation of cell suspension cultures of G. sylvestre with dried powder of fungal mycelia (DPFM) and extracellular culture filtrate (ECF) of endophytic fungi consistently enhanced the accumulation of gymnemic acid and the DPFM was proved to be an effective elicitor when compared to the ECF. The DPFM elicited the gymnemic acid content in the range of 2.57–10.45-fold, while the ECF elicited the gymnemic acid content in the range of 2.39–7.8-fold. P. globosa, a novel and a rare endophytic fungal strain, has shown a great influence on the production of gymnemic acid. Cell suspension cultures elicited with DPFM of P. globosa produced higher amount of gymnemic acid content (124.23 mg/g dried cell weight) compared to the cultures elicited with DPFM of Xylaria sp. (102.24 mg/g DCW). But the cultures treated with consortium of DPFM of both fungi showed great influence on the production of gymnemic acid (139.98 mg/g DCW) than the cultures treated with DPFM alone. Similarly, cultures treated with consortium of ECF of both fungi produced more gymnemic acid content (94.86 mg/g DCW) compared with cultures treated with ECF of Xylaria sp. (77.93 mg/g DCW) and ECF of P. globosa (78.65 mg/g DCW) alone.



Introduction

Plant cell and tissue cultures are potential and alternative sources for the large-scale production of desired bioactive compounds which cannot be synthesized chemically, due to their complex structures. For this purpose, callus and cell suspension cultures are more preferred, but their yield does not match up to the growing demands. Many researchers have attempted to increase the yield of bioactive compounds through in vitro methods such as metabolic engineering, cell immobilization, optimization of nutrient medium, nutrient manipulations (Archana et al. 2012), addition of precursors and addition of elicitors (Chodisetti et al. 2015; Kiran et al. 2011).

Elicitors are defined as biofactors or chemical molecules of biotic or abiotic origin which can trigger a similar response as stress induced in the plants. Elicitors can alter the physiological or metabolic activities in the plants by triggering signal transduction pathway which in turn can increase the production of secondary metabolites. Elicitors can trigger their response by inducing the gene expression pathways. Endophytic fungi are the intriguing fungal species which live inside the healthy plant tissues without causing any apparent symptoms of disease. In this symbiotic association, many benefits from the endophytic fungi have been transferred to the host plant, which includes production of natural active compounds (Kusari and Spiteller 2011 ), production of growth promoters, tolerance to drought, secretion of defensive chemicals for protection against pathogens, pests and diseases, biochemical modifications in their host plant (Aly et al. 2011; Wani et al. 2015), enhancers or elicitors of bioactive compounds through tissue culture systems including callus and cell suspension cultures (Dass and Ramawat 2009; Kiran et al. 2011).

Triterpenoid saponins are a class of plant secondary metabolites synthesized via isoprene pathway by the cyclization of 2,3 oxidosqualene, an aglycone precursor to which one or more sugar moieties are added (Xu et al. 2004). Triterpenoid saponins are primarily divided into two groups, oleanane (β-amyrin) and dammarene type. Triterpenoid saponins possess a wide range of pharmacological activities including inhibitory activity on glucose absorption (Hideto et al. 2006), cholesterol reducing (Gurfinkel and Rao 2003), anticancer, anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial activities (Ridout et al. 1991; Netala et al. 2015). Yields of triterpenoid saponins have been successfully enhanced in experimental systems by treating the cells and tissues with different biotic and abiotic elicitors (Veerashree et al. 2012).

Gymnema sylvestre R. Br. is a vine plant which belongs to Asclepiadaceae family, native to India, South Asia and Africa (Ye et al. 2000). The leaves of this plant are called Gur-mar, renowned for the treatment of diabetes in India for over 2000 years (Agarwal et al. 2000). The leaves also possess lipid lowering properties (Rachh et al. 2010), hepatoprotective (Jachal 2002), anti-inflammatory (Malik et al. 2008), free radical scavenging (Ohmori et al. 2005) and antimicrobial properties (Satdive et al. 2003). All these activities are mainly due to the presence of triterpenoid saponins in the leaves of G. sylvestre. The total triterpenoid saponin fraction in the leaves of G. sylvestre is called as gymnemic acid (Ye et al. 2000). 18 different types of gymnemic acids (GA I to GA XVIII) were reported from the leaves of G. sylvestre. Gymnemic acid constitutes gymnemagenin as its backbone (sapogenin) with different sugar molecules attached to it (Liu et al. 1992). Gymnemic acids are differentiated based on the type and number of sugar molecules attached to gymnemagenin. The numerous types and complex structure of gymnemic acids make their chemical synthesis very difficult for large-scale production in industry.

Many researchers have reported the successful elicitation of plant bioactive compounds by the endophytic fungi through cell suspension cultures. The accumulation of diosgenin, a steroid, was elicited through cell suspension cultures by the endophytic fungus Fusarium oxysporum Dzf17 isolated from Dioscorea zingiberensis (Peiqin et al. 2011). The accumulation of terpenoids, isoeuphpekinensin and euphol was elicited through cell suspension cultures of Euphorbia pekinensis by the endophytic fungus Fusarium sp E5 (Gao et al. 2011). The production of inophyllum was elicited by endophytic fungi Nigrospora sphaerica and Phoma spp through cell suspension cultures of Calophyllum inophyllum (Kiran et al. 2011). Endophytic fungal culture filtrate was used for the elicitation of phenyheptarin production in Bidens pilosa cell cultures (Di Cosmo and Misawa 1995). The production of indole glucosinolates and camelexin was elicited using endophytic fungus Erwinia carotovora in Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures (Brader et al. 2001). Trichoderma viridae and Pythium aphanidermatum were used for the elicitation of the production of ajmalicine (Namdeo et al. 2002) and N-acetyl-tryptamine in Catharanthus roseus cell cultures (Eilert et al.1986). The accumulation of coumarin and its derivatives was elicited through cell cultures of Petroselinum crispum by treatment with endophytic fungal elicitor (Kombrink and Hahlbrock 1986). Abiotic elicitors such as jasmonic acid and methyl jasmonate were employed for the elicitation of phenylpropanoides and centellosides in cell suspension cultures of Hypericum perforatum and Centella asiatica, respectively (Gadzovska et al. 2007; Bonfill et al. 2011).

There were reports on the elicitation of gymnemic acid through cell suspension cultures using different elicitors including methyl jasmonate, salicylic acid (Veerashree et al. 2012), yeast extract, chitin, pectin, culture filtrates of Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Agrobacterium rhizogenes and Aspergillus niger (Chodisetti et al. 2013). In this study, we report the elicitation of gymnemic acid through cell suspension cultures of leaves of G. sylvestre using two different endophytic fungi isolated from the same plant.


