
Abstract

Horn cancer (HC) is a squamous cell carcinoma of horn, commonly observed in Bos indicus of the Asian countries. To elucidate the complexity of alternative splicing present in the HC, high-throughput sequencing and analysis of HC and matching horn normal (HN) tissue were carried out. A total of 535,067 and 849,077 reads were analysed after stringent quality filtering for HN and HC, respectively. Cufflinks pipeline for transcriptome analysis revealed 4786 novel splice isoforms comprising 2432 exclusively in HC, 2055 exclusively in HN and 298 in both the conditions. Based on pathway clustering and in silico verification, 102 novel splice isoforms were selected and further analysed with respect to change in protein sequence using Blastp. Finally, fourteen novel splicing events supported both by Cufflinks and UCSC genome browser were selected and confirmed expression by RT-qPCR. Future studies targeted at in-depth characterization of these potential candidate splice isoforms might be helpful in the development of relevant biomarkers for early diagnosis of HC. The results reported in this study refine the available information on transcriptome repertoire of bovine species and boost the research in the line of development of relevant biomarkers for early diagnosis of HC.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0577-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Cancer is a multifactorial disease affecting almost every species of animals and human. Various types of cancers are prevalent in farm animals causing moderate to severe economic losses. Horn cancer (HC, cancerous tissue from affected horn) is amongst widely prevalent cancer reported in Indian zebu cattle (Bos indicus), drawing recent attention towards the necessity of in-depth studies for better understanding. HC is a progressive cancer which is classified into three different stages based on the growth of tumour tissue in the affected horn. The incidence of HC in India is more commonly seen in Kankrej breed than other zebu and crossbred cattle (Joshi et al. 2009; Udharwar et al. 2008). Exceptional few cases of HC have been reported from other countries like Sumatra (Burggraaf 1935), Brazil (Rezende and Naves 1975) and Iraq (Zubaidy 1976). The mainly affected animals are Bullocks (95%) in comparison to cows (5%), whereas it is rarely reported in bulls, buffaloes, sheep and goats (Chattopadhyay et al. 1982; Damodaran et al. 1979; Gupta et al. 1980; Kulkarni 1953). HC is a squamous cell carcinoma of horn arising from pseudo-stratified columnar epithelium of the horn core mucosa. The main difficulties in early diagnosis include the absence of specific markers and the lack of a complete understanding of the cellular hierarchy of morphogenesis of the horn core epithelium. At molecular level, HC has been studied previously for novel gene content (Jakhesara et al. 2013b) and global gene expression (Tripathi et al. 2012).

Horn cancer involves complex interplay of several genes which are up-regulated or down-regulated and results in the transformation of normal horn tissue to malignant one. In horn cancer, the interplay of three genes KRT6A, KRT6B, and KRT6C has been observed in cancer. Over and above these keratin protein family members, there is also up-regulation of a novel candidate KRT84. Other genes of keratin family, KRT14 and KRT5, are specifically expressed in the basal layer of the epidermis and found to be up-regulated in HC. Gene KRT14 expression can be considered as a candidate of proliferative activity and metastatic potential of SCC in horn. Besides keratin family genes, Stratifin (SFN), Anilin (ANLN), NR4A1 and SCGB1A1 (Uteroglobin) were also significantly up-regulated in HC tissue. While, a number of genes were observed to be down-regulated in HC including CXCL17, KRT19 and BPIFB1 which are known to be involved in anti-tumour immune reactions. CXCL17 has also been reported to have potential tumour suppressor activity (Hiraoka et al. 2011). BPIFB1 is commonly known as long palate, lung and nasal epithelium carcinoma-associated protein 1 (LPLUNC1) expressed in the epithelium of upper respiratory tract (Bingle et al. 2010). Additional details about commonly expressed genes in HC are described elsewhere (Koringa et al. 2013).

Amongst diverse type of changes present in the cancer, overrepresentation of aberrant mRNA transcripts is the most common and widely reported observation (Jakhesara et al. 2013a; Li et al. 2013; Erho et al. 2012). Alternative splicing (AS) is the phenomenon by which the exons of primary transcripts are used alternatively to produce structurally and functionally distinct mRNA (splice isoforms) and protein variants, which might be one of the most extensively used mechanisms that accounts for the greater cellular complexity of higher eukaryotic organisms (Irimia and Blencowe 2012). Cancer cells may exhibit defective regulation of this alternative exon usage that can result in changes with potential transcriptome-wide consequences to gene function. It is imperative that AS can result in increased protein repertoire of the cell encoding alternative protein forms with biological functions that differ from the canonical product of the locus. AS transcripts exhibit changes to the primary transcript and might result in transcripts and/or protein isoforms with loss or disruption of domains responsible for original function.

Detailed investigation and understanding of complexity of AS events exhibited by cancer cells are very important as it provides important clues about structural and functional consequences of deregulated genes. Until recently, profound cost, limited coverage and sensitivity of the sequencing and microarray studies were hindering the global study of AS events in the cell; however, with advancement in the next-generation sequencing technologies now it is possible to do the same. Although, HC has been studied recently for detection of AS events, the information generated was on limited scale, with small size of dataset and analysis lacking RNA-Seq-specific pipeline (Patel et al. 2013). In the present study, we employed high-throughput pyro sequencing combined with Cufflinks workflow optimized for RNA-Seq to elucidate complexity of the AS in HC transcriptome. Here, we report AS events exhibited in HC and HN tissue and confirmed their significant association with HC by RT-qPCR.



Discussion

Cancer results from culmination of variety of genetic and epigenetic changes occurring over a period of time. In such a disease, it would be very much helpful to examine molecular signatures that differentiate normal cell from cancer one, as it will unravel nature and pathologic behaviour of a cancer cell. Here, we have made an attempt to unravel the novel splice isoforms expressed in horn cancer as a result of complex RNA editing events through high-throughput transcriptome analyses of horn cancer and its normal counterpart. We found and validated several splice isoforms expressed in horn cancer that might play a role in progression of horn cancer. Our results show that high-throughput transcriptome sequencing along with cautious in silico and wet lab validation approaches can identify novel splice isoforms associated with cancer.

Our analyses with Cuffdiff for differential expression revealed several differentially expressed known isoforms in HC. Many of the gene isoforms identified are known to be involved in varieties of cancers; however, it would be important to discuss top deregulated and differentially expressed known gene isoforms in the present study. Amongst top up-regulated isoforms, KRT gene isoforms (KRT6A-11 fold, KRT6B-11 fold, KRT14-5 fold and KRT17-5 fold) are expressed during differentiation of simple and stratified epithelial tissues, which justify their overexpression in horn cancer. These genes are also reported for overexpression in squamous cell carcinoma of lung (Hawthorn et al. 2006; Ohkura et al. 2005; Xue et al. 2011). At the second place, isoforms of CA1 (8-fold) and CA2 (6.5-fold) genes were significantly overexpressed in HC. Both the gene isoforms are implicated in more advanced stage of the oral squamous cell carcinoma but not with metastasis (Liu et al. 2012). These isoforms might serve as a prospective biomarker to predict growth and metastasis of tumour cells. Next up-regulated isoform TNS4 variant (CTEN) is a member of family of proteins that are localized to integrin-linked focal adhesions. CTEN is implicated for increasing invasiveness through colony formation and anchorage-independent growth in colorectal, breast, gastric and pancreatic cancers (Liao et al. 2009; Sakashita et al. 2008; Albasri et al. 2011; Al-Ghamdi et al. 2013). SAA3 isoform which encodes for serum amyloid A protein has been widely studied as a marker in inflammation. Though its association in cancer is yet to be studied, it is observed that it might play a role in pre-metastatic stage and increases migration of metastatic cells to lungs (Hiratsuka et al. 2008). This observation makes SAA3 a plausible candidate target gene to track and prevent metastasis. CDH3 isoform encoding for adhesion glycoprotein is a member of cadherin family responsible for cell–cell adhesion and reported for its overexpression in several cancers (Paredes et al. 2012). RCAN1 isoform encodes for protein regulator of calcineurin 1 and its overexpression inhibits migration of cancer cells (Espinosa et al. 2009). Amongst top down-regulated isoforms, BPIFB1 (8-fold) and BPIFA1 (6-fold) are members of a family of secreted proteins with unclear biological role and function, but it has been reported that these proteins are differentially expressed in lung diseases (Bingle et al. 2012). CXCL17 is a latest member of the C-X-C chemokine family proteins and aberrant expression of it promotes tumour progression through angiogenesis (Matsui et al. 2012). Next down-regulated isoforms FOS and FOSB (7-fold) are members of FOS family of proteins involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and transformation. These proteins are extensively studied and their down-regulation is shown to promote tumour progression and metastasis (Kim et al. 2010). TPPP3 isoform, also known as p20, is a new member of the tubulin polymerization promoting protein (TPPP) family playing a role in microtubule assembly. TPPP3 protein is not reported in cancer, but its knockdown suppressed cell proliferation and induced cell cycle arrest in HeLa cells (Zhou et al. 2010). Three isoforms GP2, RNASE4 and ADRA2A amongst top down-regulated genes are not reported to be differentially expressed in cancer. CITED2 isoform encoding for Cbp/P300-Interacting Transactivator protein plays an important role in cell proliferation by responding to TGF-α induction and TGF-β suppression to orchestrate cellular proliferation and quiescence, respectively. It is also reported that CITED2 knockdown caused tumour shrinkage and increased overall host mouse survival rates (Chou et al. 2012).

Gene ontology and pathway analyses of differentially expressed isoforms revealed important insights about the predominantly affected functions in HC. Gene ontology suggested that HC is an actively growing tumour with changes involving epithelial cell differentiation and epithelium development with angiogenesis. Pathway analyses suggested that cancer pathways and MAPK signalling pathway responsible for uncontrolled cell growth are differentially enriched in HC. Further in-depth analysis of genes involved in MAPK/ERK signalling pathway is necessary to support and confirm their role in uncontrolled cell growth. Pathway analysis also resulted in clustering of pathways related to cardiomyopathy. Investigation of the genes (ACTN1, ACTN4, ADCY6, CTNNB1, DSP, EMD, ITGA2, ITGA5, ITGAV, ITGB1, ITGB3, ITGB5, JUP, PRKAA1, TPM1, TPM2, TPM4, and TCF7) clustered under the cardiomyopathy pathways revealed involvement of these genes in calcium binding pathways. As, calcium binding is important for normal functioning of heart through binding with troponins, enrichment of these genes resulted in the enrichment of cardiomyopathy pathways (Farah and Reinach 1995).

Our analyses with Cuffcompare detected several transcripts with novel splicing amongst all detected transcripts classified as intergenic, complete match, novel or unknown. To reduce these novel splicing events to more meaningful conclusion and to reduce number of false positives, we employed rigorous bioinformatics analysis. As a first step, we reduced these numbers by selecting only those novel splice events which were clustered along with cancer pathways in pathway analysis; this helped us to select splicing events which might be associated with HC. Second, we analysed all selected splicing events by UCSC genome browser, BLAT and IGV to check for EST support, to verify novel splicing and to eliminate splicing events not supported by reads, respectively. We also eliminated the events which were present at the end of the reads. As a third and final step, we performed blastp of the translated protein sequences of novel splices transcripts to examine amino acid changes in the sequence of the protein. In this step, we selected only splicing events which resulted in significant protein change or premature stop codon. Eventually, we selected 14 novel splicing events and confirmed their presence by end-point PCR and by RT-qPCR. This intensive selection and filtering of novel splicing events made sure that only splice isoforms which might be significantly associated with HC are analysed.

Our validation of selected novel splicing events revealed discrepancy in the expression profiles obtained by RT-qPCR with that of RNA-Seq. The contrasting differential expression profile obtained with RT-qPCR in few isoforms reveals the limitation of RNA-Seq to identify reads originating from specific isoform and therefore requires additional validation using RT-qPCR for changes in gene expression, while confirmation of almost all splicing events by RT-qPCR denotes reliability of RNA-Seq for high throughput detection of novel splicing events. Additionally, differential expression of all in silico selected splice isoforms across multiple cancer samples validates our approach for selection of novel splice isoforms relevant to cancer. We found a consistent pattern of down-regulation or up-regulation in both the reference and variant isoforms across all four samples, which emphasizes the possible development of these isoforms as biomarkers for horn cancer. Additionally, 9 out of 14 variants that we selected contain premature termination codon as a result of novel splicing; however, it requires further detailed investigation of effects produced by nonsense-mediated decay of these aberrant transcript on overall expression of the gene, if any.

Since horn cancer has been analysed previously for detection of novel splice variants (Patel et al. 2013), we sought to identify any differences or similarities between results, if any. Surprisingly, none of the previously identified and validated eight splice isoforms were detected in the present study. However, several reasons could be attributed for such an observation. As the previous study was a preliminary study involving small size of dataset without any quality filtering of the data, skipping of all the previous events identified is quite possible. Second, the present study identified and selected a set of novel splice isoforms whose probability of association with horn cancer is much more, as the events were identified in a logical and systematic way after enrichment of genes associated with horn cancer using GO analysis. Third, the software used for assembly (GS de novo assembler vs Cufflinks) and detection of splice events (Blat vs Cuffcompare) was different and it is important to note that full-length transcript assembly is very difficult, which is additionally complicated by artifacts in sample preparation, sequencing and read alignment. The above listed reasons and small-scale analysis without any type of selection criteria of previously generated dataset resulted in skipping of already identified novel splice isoforms. Nonetheless, the findings reported in the present study are absolutely novel and add to existing knowledge about splice isoforms in HC.

The 14 novel splicing events selected for verification might be considered as biomarkers as their potential effect on cancer progression. Consistent down-regulation of both the reference and variant was found for FOS gene by RT-qPCR across four HC samples. Alternate 3′ splicing of exon2 in FOS resulted in premature stop codon just after position 104 aa culminating in loss of basic leucine zipper DNA-binding domain responsible for specific DNA binding. Although transcripts containing premature stop codon are subjected to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), it has been studied that stress response elicited in tumour microenvironment leads to inhibition of NMD (Wang et al. 2011). Further studies are required to support such speculation and to study the effect of aberrant expression of this splice isoform on tumour progression. MAPK9 splice isoform which is a member of MAP kinase family of genes is also called as c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK2) involved in proliferation, differentiation, transcription regulation and development (Raciti et al. 2012). MAPK9 splice isoform exhibited premature stop codon after 293 aa and loss of domain responsible for serine/threonine kinase activity. We observed consistent up-regulation of both the reference and variant for MAPK9 gene by RT-qPCR across four HC samples. FGFR1 and FGFR2 are the members of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) family of genes with a variety of roles in cancer (Holzmann et al. 2012). Splice variation in FGFR1 led to loss of IG1 domain which leads to activation of distinct signalling cascades (Zhang et al. 2006), while splice change observed in FGFR2 with loss of PTKc domain could not be validated with RT-PCR. Both the genes FGFR1 and FGFR2, reference and variant, were found to be down-regulated by RT-qPCR. MFAP4 encodes for bovine microfibril-associated protein with probable role in calcium-dependent cell adhesion or intercellular interactions. We also observed intron retention in HSP90AB1 transcript resulting in premature termination after 380 aa position. HSP90AB1 plays an important role in folding newly synthesized proteins or stabilizing and refolding denatured proteins after stress (Cheng et al. 2012). RPS6KB1 splice isoform is part of a protein kinase family involved in the regulation of cellular growth, insulin, and cellular energy. Overexpression of RPS6KB1 plays an important role in hepatocellular carcinoma (Li et al. 2012) and correlates with adverse prognosis. Similarly, CREBBP (Mullighan et al. 2011), CRK (Sriram and Birge 2010), PTPN6 and PTPRU (Hoekstra et al. 2012) genes which might play a probable role in cancer revealed premature termination with loss of domains related to function as shown in Table 2. SUFU gene encodes negative regulator of Hedgehog signalling pathway exhibiting signalling cascade that plays a role in pattern formation and cellular proliferation during development. The gene is not well studied in the bovine, but two isoforms with different c terminal have been reported in humans (Tostar et al. 2012). SUFU splice isoform identified in this study encodes for longer isoform with different C terminal than reference. FN1 encodes fibronectin, a glycoprotein present at the cell surface and in extracellular matrix and is involved in cell adhesion and migration processes including embryogenesis, wound healing, blood coagulation, host defense, and metastasis (Goossens et al. 2009). Splice variation of novel exon 25 and skipping of exon 32 revealed in this isoform and resulted in varying length of protein without frameshift. In total, we confirmed expression of these 13 novel splice isoforms, however it remains to be investigated whether these putative protein isoforms are indeed translated in to proteins and in turn functional consequences of these variations. Furthermore, we found an interesting aspect of our analysis of AS events in HC as majority of novel splice isoforms supported by ESTs reported in bovine foetus. This may be due to the activation of genes or isoforms taking part in the foetal development by carcinogenic genes. This observation is supported by an earlier study showing antigenic similarity between bovine horn cancer and foetal tissue (Kuchroo et al. 1979).
