
Abstract

Biosynthetic adaptation of endophytic bacteria to chemically support host plant is very remarkable. Hence these organisms from medicinal plants are considered as highly valuable sources for natural products with diverse bioactivity. Their metabolite diversity and biosynthetic versatility have been increasingly explored for drug discovery. In this study, an endophytic Bacillus mojavensis with broad spectrum antibacterial properties has been analyzed for the chemical basis of its activity. By LC–MS/MS the organism was identified to have the biosynthetic ability to produce lipopeptides surfactin and fengycin. The impressive antibacterial activity of B. mojavensis as reported in the study indicates its broad antimicrobial applications.



Introduction

Endophytic bacteria and host plant mutualistically support each other to manage various environmental stresses. Biodiversity richness and biosynthetic versatility of endophytes make them a treasure trove of unexplored natural products (Jasim et al. 2013a). Microbial production of diverse chemical scaffolds with broad phyto-interactive or protective properties may expect to provide preference for their endophytic life. Identification of such promising isolates can have immense applications in various fields ranging from clinical, industry to agriculture.

One of the most important bacterial groups with common endophytic association with plants and heavy deposition of biosynthetic pathway include those of the Bacillus sp. Various species of Bacillus have been reported to have remarkable distribution of lipopeptide compounds synthesized by non-ribosomal peptide synthase (NRPS) (Moyne et al. 2004). These compounds have a common amphipathic structure with a hydrophilic peptide and a hydrophobic fatty acid region. The lipopeptide compounds synthesized by Bacillus spp. are considered to have the potential to manage infections caused by multidrug resistant and biofilm forming pathogens (Fracchia et al. 2015; Meena and Kanwar 2015). Rapid development of microbial resistance against lipopeptides is prevented by direct membrane binding based mechanism of action of these compounds (Straus and Hancock 2006). Because of these, exploration of novel sources for bacterial strains with multipotent lipopeptide synthesizing property is very important. This property has also been demonstrated in relatively new members of genus Bacillus like B. mojavensis. They differ from the related Bacillus subtilis by fatty acid composition, DNA sequence and resistance to genetic transformation (Bacon and Hinton 2011). They have been reported to form surfactin, iturin and fengycin group of lipopeptide as basis of its antimicrobial effects (Mounia et al. 2014). Among these compounds, broad spectrum antibacterial activity have been described for surfactin and antifungal activity for fengycin.

Bacillus mojavensis associated endophytically with medicinal plants can expect to have promising lipopeptide synthesizing property. Hence, B. mojavensis isolated from the plant Bacopa monnieri (L.) was selected as organism for the current study. The plant is used in traditional medicinal formulations and is having different types of bacopasides, stigmasterol and other saponins as its active constituents. The endophytic B. mojavensis isolated from the plant was observed to have broad antibacterial activity towards gram positive and gram negative organisms but was without any antifungal activity. Interestingly, the organism was positive for surfactin biosynthetic gene in PCR analysis. Further LC–MS/MS based analysis confirmed it to have the ability to synthesize surfactin (M+H+—1008.6602, 1022.6755) and fengycin (M+H+—1491.8195, 1477.8055) derivatives. This makes the study significantly interesting to explore the application of B. mojavensis in various fields.


