
Abstract

Hyposidra talaca is a major defoliating pest of tea plants in north-eastern part of India. In this study, we look for variations (if any) in the attacking virus. Viral samples were collected from different regions of the northern part of West Bengal in India and were analyzed by PCR technique to study the variations across the region. The partial segment of the HytaNPV polyhedrin gene was cloned and sequenced. A 527 bp nucleotide sequence containing highly conserved region from polyhedrin gene of HytaNPV was observed. The blast homology search for studied polyhedrin gene showed 98% sequence identity with the sequence of previous reported NPV of H. talaca, H. infixaria and Buzura suppressaria. Pathogenicity study against second instar H. talaca indicated that the LC50 values ranged from 4.61 × 105 to 7.57 × 105 polyhedral occlusion bodies per ml (POBs/ml) and the LT50 values ranged from 4.2 to 6.66 days. Sequencing result reveals that the same HytaNPV strain dominates across this area and the pathogenicity indicates its potential as an alternative to chemical insecticides to control H. talaca.



Introduction

Baculoviruses are renowned for most widely studied virus of insects. More than 700 baculoviruses have been isolated mainly from the insect species of the orders Diptera, Hymenoptera and Lepidoptera. Nucleopolyhedroviruses (NPVs), which are a part of baculovirus, are considered as potential biocontrol agents and have been applied successfully against larvae of many insect pests in the world (Hu et al. 1993; Ma et al. 2007). NPVs are mainly pathogenic for insects of Lepidoptera. Polyhedrin gene of NPV is considered as one of the most conserved baculovirus genes (Jehle 2004), and for the development of the genetic amplification technique, this gene proved its efficiency (Woo 2001). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique can amplify target DNA sequence and it has been used in baculovirus screening since the last three decades (Burand et al. 1992; Ikuno et al. 2004; Galal 2009; Hewson et al. 2011; Arneodo et al. 2012). The PCR technique is suitable for diagnosis of viruses as identification, characterization as well as for their genome investigation (Moraes and Maruniak 1997; Fattouch et al. 2005).

The characteristics of NPVs that empower it to be useful as biopesticide are its high pathogenicity, host specificity, less chances of cross-infectivity and having the ability of rapid distribution. The virus has stable occlusion bodies and can effectively suppress a target pest from a crop field (Moscardi 1999). In this regard, Hyposidra talaca nucleopolyhedrovirus (HytaNPV) is an extremely infectious natural agent causing most destructive disease to the tea pest Hyposidra talaca. In India, HytaNPV is reported in Terai and Dooars part of North Bengal (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010; Antony et al. 2011; Sinu et al. 2015). The development of such control agent starts with the isolation of naturally occurring entomopathogens and followed by their identification, characterization as well as the evaluation of their virulence.

The H. talaca looper caterpillar (Walk.) (Lepidoptera: Geometridae) is an economically significant defoliating pest of the tea belt in the north-eastern part of India. Previously, Buzura suppressaria (Guen.) (Lepidoptera: Geometridae), a major tea defoliator in India and China, was dominant in this region, but gradually it was suppressed by the current destructive pest H. talaca (Hazarika et al. 2009). In the last decade, H. talaca was introduced into tea agro-ecosystem and caused severe damages in the tea industry. It spread all over the northern part of West Bengal (WB) and Assam in 2006 (Sinu et al. 2011). As the management of H. talaca is carried out with their population monitoring and respective damage control application of chemical pesticides, which are mainly organophosphates and synthetic pyrethroids (Sannigrahi and Talukdar 2003; Sarker and Mukhopadhyay 2006), there is an urgent need to find an alternative control method. Among few natural enemies of the pest, HytaNPV is found to be active and causes epizootics within a dense population of H. talaca (Sinu et al. 2015). Successive generations of insect host are infected by polyhedra; thus the host serves as a reservoir of inoculums.

Due to the high potency of the virus as chemical alternative, finding out the naturally improved isolates of the virus is a matter of great interest. PCR-based diagnosis was used for identification, establishment of relationship and also to find out the variation within the tested HytaNPVs. The primary aim of the study was to identify the most potential isolate of HytaNPV. Examination of the samples from four different geographic locations was done for the above-mentioned identification and simultaneously infectivity evaluation was conducted to determine their successful practical use, by laboratory bioassay. This study may play an important role in the programs of integrated pest management (IPM).



Discussion

Virus is now an important subject for the development of biopesticides and to maintain the ecosystem in the agricultural field. Search of a new natural isolate of virus, which contains better biopesticidal characteristics, to control insect pest is still an important aspect in biological control. In this regard, baculoviruses like NPVs are well known for their variability, frequent genetic variation and differences in their biology. These qualities remain intact even when the NPV isolates are sampled from the same species of different geographical locations (Cory et al. 2005).

H. talaca plays a leading role in reducing tea production throughout the north-eastern tea hub of India (Basu Majumdar and Ghosh 2004). H. talaca was reported as a tea defoliator in Java (Yunus and Ho 1980) and it was also reported as a major pest of mango, cacao and other forest trees (Entwistle 1972; Muniappan and Viraktamath 1986; Singh and Singh 2004). Some entomopathogenic bacteria and NPV, infecting the pest, have been reported from north-eastern part of India (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2010; Antony et al. 2011). However, commercial use of these microorganisms in this region is still far away. Unlike China and Japan, there is no considerable progress in using naturally occurring baculoviruses in integrated pest management of tea in India. In China, significant response of BusuNPV and EcobNPV against B. suppressaria and E. oblique made these NPVs commercially available (Hu et al. 1993; Ma et al. 2007). In India, HytaNPV can be an effective control measure against H. talaca. The result of the PCR study showed the presence of single NPV strain across the entire north-eastern tea hub of India. In lepidopteran NPVs, the full length of polyhedrin gene ranges from 483 to 747 bp (Jehle et al. 2006), and the 527 bp partial segment of the studied polyhedrin gene also fits within it. In the present study, the partial amplification of HytaNPV-P infecting H. talaca, showed 98% nucleotide sequence identity and 100% similarity in amino acids with previously published HytaNPV (Antony et al. 2011). HytaNPV-P also showed the same sequence identity with HyinNPV and BusuNPV (Indian isolate). This implies that HytaNPV-P is closely related to the aforesaid NPVs. Interestingly, HytaNPV-P also showed high sequence identity with the Chinese isolate of NPV infecting B. suppressaria. In this case, HytaNPV-P showed 98% similarity in amino acids with BusuNPV (acc. no. YP009001778, Chinese isolate) and only three amino acid differences were observed in the polyhedrin gene of HytaNPV-P and BusuNPV (Chinese isolate). This similarity indicates that HytaNPV-P is also related to the isolate of BusuNPV from China.

Phylogenetic studies have shown that HytaNPV-P, HytaNPV, HyinNPV and BusuNPV (Indian isolate) belong to same clade and the derived tree also encourages the fact that a variant of the Chinese isolate of BusuNPV (acc. no. YP009001778) infects the HytaNVP-P. However, full genome sequencing is necessary to confirm whether the HytaNPV-P altogether is a different virus or a different isolate of BusuNPV (China).

After ingestion of polyhedral occlusion bodies by larvae, NPV virions reach the midgut and spread to cause infection (Petrik et al. 2003). The results showed the effectiveness of the application of isolated NPV through tea leaves. In the present study, the SMB isolate of the Terai region showed higher LC50 value for second instar than the previously reported value of 2.8 × 103 POBs/ml (from Terai region) by Mukhopadhyay et al.. On the other hand, we found the RJB isolate (from Eastern Dooars), WSB isolate (from Western Dooars) and TLP isolate (from Central Dooars), which were respectively 5 times, 2.3 times and 3.4 times less active than the SMB isolate. The reasons for the variability may be the different geographic locations (Terai and Dooars) and differences in larval age (Payne et al. 1981) and feeding habit (Lacey et al. 2002). The number of virions per occlusion body and the host susceptibility differences to NPV (El-Salamouny et al. 2003) can be the other possible causes. However, for cross reference, there is no other report of bioassay available at this point for this particular tea pest. Stiles and Himmerich also observed higher LC50 of AcMNPV against second instar Heliothis zea (i.e., 6.38 × 105 POBs/ml). Second instar larvae of Spodoptera littoralis were also highly susceptible to the SpliMNPV at the higher concentration of 2 × 106 POBs/ml, which caused a high rate of mortality than the lower concentration (Sutanto et al. 2014).

The virulence of baculoviruses is measured by the killing speed of the concerned virus to the insect host (Van-Beek and Hughes 1998) and is necessary to know the correct time for pest management programs. The highest inoculums of 108 POBs/ml of HytaNPV showed rapid killing speed with LT50 value of 3.25 to 3.89 days after treatment for four isolates. Lower concentrations take longer time to meet the same level of larval mortality.

The result shows decreasing trend in mortality with the decreasing dosage. Although this relation between the rate of change in mortality with the lessening dosage is not directly proportional, as the dose decreases ten times the mortality rate is decreased well less than ten times. Previous studies also support this observation (Jankevica and Zarins 1999; Sajap et al. 2000; Sethuraman and Narayanan 2010; Mukhopadhyay et al. 2011; Sutanto et al. 2014). However, the regression result in Table 2 shows that a positive correlation exists between mortality and dosage, as all the slope values are positive and infinitesimal Chi squares signify that there is a good linear fit. Both the studies of LC50 and LT50 satisfied the insecticidal characteristics of HytaNPV. HytaNPV isolated from H. talaca is being developed as a biopesticide for the control of H. talaca.
