
Abstract

Some lignocellulosic food byproducts such as potato peels, wheat bran, barley bran and chestnut shells were evaluated as potential sources of xylose for microbial xylitol production by yeasts. Potential yeast strains were selected after screening xylitol production of some indigenous yeasts in a defined fermentation medium. Candida tropicalis strains gave the highest results with 83.28 and 54.07 g/L xylitol production from 100 g/L xylose. Lignocellulosic materials were exposed to acid hydrolysis at different conditions. Chestnut shells gave the highest xylose yield and the hydrolysate of chestnut shells was used in further experiments in which xylitol productions of two potential C. tropicalis strains were investigated. Combined detoxification method including evaporation, overliming and activated charcoal with the use of threefold concentration and also yeast extract supplementation suggested to be efficient for both growth and product formation in chestnut shell hydrolysate in which 40 % xylitol yield was obtained. It was concluded that detoxified and fortified chestnut shell hydrolysate could be a potential medium for xylitol production.



Introduction

Xylitol is a naturally occurring five-carbon sugar alcohol that is used commercially as a natural sweetener in various food products. It is principally used in certain sweetened products such as confectionery, in personal health products such as mouthwash and toothpaste, and in the pharmaceutical industry such as a sweetener or coating agent for pharmaceutical products (Rafiqul and Mimi Sakinah 2013). Commercial chemical production of xylitol is based on hydrogenation of xylose in a nickel-catalysed process which is an energy and cost-demanding. Therefore, it is known that some alternative biotechnological processes have been studied, especially those involving yeasts from Candida genus (Ur-Rehman et al. 2015). Xylitol is an intermediate metabolite of xylose utilization by microbial strains. Numerous microbial species have a metabolic system with NADPH-dependent xylose reductase and NAD+-dependent xylitol dehydrogenase enzymes which are induced by xylose. Candida tropicalis, Candida guilliermondii, Candida athensensis, Candida parapsilosis and Debaryomyces hansenii are among the yeast species reported to produce high yields of xylitol (Albuquerque et al. 2015b; Mohamad et al. 2015).

Lignocellulosic materials are widespread, abundant, renewable, cost effective and economical sources of polysaccharides which can be used for xylitol production. Residues of some agricultural and food industries contain lignocellulose as organic matter which is mainly composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and smaller amounts of pectin, protein and ashes. Hemicellulose, which is not chemically homogenous, comprises of pentoses (xylose, arabinose), hexoses (mannose, glucose, galactose), and sugar acids (Ur-Rehman et al. 2015). After pretreatment with acid, alkali and/or enzymes, the carbohydrate fraction of the plant cell wall can be converted into monomeric fermentable sugars (Chandel et al. 2013). Xylose is a major sugar derived from the hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass, among the other sugars, such as mannose, galactose, arabinose, and rhamnose. Acid hydrolysis using diluted concentrations of acids is a very widespread treatment due to its efficiency in the process of obtaining sugars (Albuquerque et al. 2015b). However, products that are considered toxic for microbial growth, such as phenolic compounds, furfural, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, acetic acid, and formic acid are formed (Albuquerque et al. 2015b; Mustapa Kamal et al. 2011; Mateo et al. 2014). Several detoxification methods have been reported to be effective in reducing the inhibitors. The most common methods employed are; neutralization and overliming, biological adaptation, extraction with organic solvent, adsorption with activated charcoal and ion-exchange resins. The effectiveness of the methods depends on the types of hemicellulosic hydrolysate and the species of microorganisms employed because different types of hydrolysate have different degrees of toxicity and each microorganism with different degrees of tolerance to inhibitors (Mustapa Kamal et al. 2011).

The aim of this study was to investigate potential use of some hemicellulosic hydrolysates prepared from lignocellulosic byproducts as sources of xylose for xylitol production by indigenous yeast strains.


