
Abstract

The objective of this work was to produce an herbicide by submerged fermentation in a stirred-tank bioreactor and to assess the potential herbicidal in pre-emergence, post-emergence, and in a detached leaves of Cucumis sativus var species. wisconsin (cucumber) and Sorghum bicolor (sorghum) species. Fermentations were carried out in a stirred-tank bioreactor with useful volume of 3L. Stirring rate (40, 50, and 60 rpm) and aeration (1, 2 and 3 vvm) were the variables studied for bioherbicide production. Fermented broth was fractioned with different solvents to identify the molecules produced by the fungus in a multi-dimensional gas chromatograph system. Bioherbicide showed 100% inhibition of germination of both species in the pre-emergence tests. From detached leaves tests were verified yellowish lesions in Cucumis sativus and necrotic lesions on leaves of Sorghum bicolor. Post-emergence test presented variation of the phytotoxicity from 25 to 66% for the species C. sativus and from 32 to 58% by S. bicolor. The metabolites produced by submerged fermentation of Phoma sp. presented activity in pre-emergence, post-emergence, and detached leaves of C. sativus and S. bicolor and it could be an alternative in the future for weed control.



Introduction

In recent years, the market for organic foods is increasing as well as the concept of sustainable agriculture. The development of safe and eco-friendly herbicides is an emergent necessity to control weeds in these cultivations (Yang et al. 2014). Biological weed control strategies can potentially address this need and provide novel modes of action that will inhibit the growth of weeds that are resistant to more commonly used herbicides (Harding and Raizada 2015). Inundative biological control (which refers to the application of propagation of fungal spores or bacterial suspensions in concentrations that would not normally occur in nature with the intention of destroying a pest species within a managed area) is the strategy more employed (Bailey et al. 2011).

Although, a great number of microbial herbicide has been developed, only a few of them are available in commercial forms due to several constraints in the formulation, application, and commercialization. Biocontrol agents probably fail to be marketed internationally as these are living organisms and are fearful to introduce them from foreign countries (Chutia et al. 2007). For this reason, the future trend is the production of herbicidal compounds by fermentation, extract it from fermented broth, and use this compound in a more stable formulation. This strategy will not be limited on the continued survival of a given organism in an uncontrolled environment (Harding and Raizada 2015).

The use of microbial metabolites as bioherbicide is well reported in literature, especially for fungus of genera Phoma (Hubbard et al. 2015, 2016; Kalam et al. 2014; Bailey et al. 2013; Andolfi et al. 2013). In a previous study, we also have used Phoma sp. to produce a bioherbicide by solid-state fermentation (Klaic et al. 2016), with promising results. However, the scale-up of solid-state fermentation process is complicated due to difficult to remove the metabolic heat generated during the process (Mazutti et al. 2010). One possibility is the production of bioherbicide by submerged fermentation, which is a process well established industrially. However, it is necessary to evaluate the influence of process variables such as stirring rate and agitation on metabolite production, because biosynthesis of active secondary metabolites by fungi occurs as a specific response to the different growing environments (Bracarense and Takahashi 2014). It is well documented that stirring rate affects severally the growth of microorganism due to shear stress (Serrano-Carreón et al. 2015; Garcia-Ochoa et al. 2013; Maldonado et al. 2012). So, it is necessary to select appropriate levels for these variables in bench-scale bioreactors before scale-up the process (Formentini et al. 2014).

Based on these aspects, the present study investigates the bioherbicide production by Phoma sp. in a stirred-tank bioreactor containing liquid media. Stirring rate (40, 50, and 60 rpm) and aeration (1, 2 and 3 vvm) were the variables studied. Different bioassays were applied to assess the herbicidal activity of fermented broth without cells in pre-emergence, post-emergence, and in detached leaves of C. sativus and S. bicolor. In the assay with maximum herbicidal activity, the molecules produced were fractioned with different solvents and further identified in a multi-dimensional gas chromatograph system.


