
Abstract

Sugar fatty acid esters are practical importance and have a variety of applications that include surfactants and as an emulsifying agent. In this study, we report glucose stearate synthesis using lipase-Fe3O4 nanoparticles catalyst. The influence of various reaction factors, such as silica gel concentration, molar ratio of sugar/acid, reaction temperature and speed of agitation on esterification by immobilized enzyme was analyzed. The glucose stearate esterification degree of 87.2 % was obtained under the optimized condition: 1:2 molar ratio of glucose/stearic acid, 2 % (w/v) of silica gel at 120 rpm and 40 °C. Glucose esters were characterized according to their surfactant activity like emulsification index, oil displacement activity and antimicrobial activity. The results indicated glucose stearate acts as biosurfactant, with emulsification index of 66 % in mustard oil and oil displacement activity of 19.64 cm2.



Introduction

Biosurfactants are surface active substances, consisting both hydrophobic (lipids) and hydrophilic (sugar) portion on its molecules (Mulligan 2005). The main function of surfactants is to reduce surface and interface tensions between hydrophobic substances (oil, hydrocarbons and sterols) and hydrophilic water molecules (Desai and Banat 1997). In recent years, surfactants play an important role in medical, food, agricultural, cosmetic and bioremediation process industries (Amézcua et al. 2007; Dickinson 2009; Joshi et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2010; Rodrigues et al. 2006; Seydlová and Svobodová 2008).

Many carbohydrate esters synthesis by lipase enzyme, for instance, are used as antibacterial agents in food industry. The ester may be produced from renewable source and inexpensive substances under mild reaction conditions, which minimize side reactions compared to the chemical process (Nair et al. 2012). The environmental concern about chemical surfactants is promoting the exploration on the use of biosurfactant. In the past few years, there is a huge demand for biosurfactants over chemical surfactant because of its low toxicity to environment and biodegradability (Chamouleau et al. 2001; Nitschke and Csta 2007; Park et al. 2004; Tsavas et al. 2002). The application of chemically synthesized sugar esters is limited, because they are produced at high temperatures in toxic solvents and expensive purification is required. Even though the application of this surfactant is diversified, it is being limited due to problems associated with its preparation (Maja et al. 2008; Hill and Rhode 1999).

The nonionic biosurfactants of sugar ester are obtained from microbial and enzymatic process using renewable and inexpensive substrate (Atanu et al. 2008; Kshirsagar and Singhal 2007; Sabeder et al. 2006; Ye et al. 2010). Enzymatic process is quite favorable for sugar ester synthesis due to high specificity, high efficiency and lesser downstream process (Li et al. 2010; Plou et al. 2002; Sengupta et al. 2010). Many of the reports suggested that removal of water molecule during the esterification in reaction medium via molecular sieves, azeotropic distillation and pervaporation methods (Seydlová and Svobodová 2008). However, the industrial application of the biocatalysts is limited because of its high cost and difficult processing (Yong et al. 2008). To overcome the above limitations enzyme immobilization on supports materials was used (Ming et al. 2012; Yan et al. 2014; Hamidah et al. 2009). Immobilizations help for better dispersion of enzyme in reaction medium and also reduce enzyme contamination and facilitate easy separation of products (Badgujar et al. 2014).

In recent years, nanoparticles have been used as support material for lipase immobilization. Among the nanostructures, magnetic nanoparticles are low in toxicity and are easy to separate from reaction medium by applying a magnetic field (Jiang et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2011; Sohrabi et al. 2014). Recently, glucose esters synthesis by immobilized Candida antarctica lipase catalysis has been reported (Jiang et al. 2009). In the present work, we report lipase covalently immobilized on functionalized magnetic nanoparticles. We have investigated enzymatic synthesis of glucose ester using glucose and stearic acid as substrate. The effect of various reaction conditions for glucose ester synthesis was studied. We have also characterized the glucose esters by their surfactant and antimicrobial properties.


