
Abstract

Escherichia coli strains from sewage sample were screened for the presence and expression of heavy metal-translocating zntA gene by PCR and RT-PCR analysis with type culture of K-12 as standard strain. The strain which showed high level of gene expression (SBVP1) was chosen to further study the growth and heavy metal translocation. This superior strain was grown in the presence of ZnSO4, Pb (CH3COO)2 and mixture of ZnSO4, Pb(CH3COO)2 metal salts and the growth was observed at different time points. The cell pellet fraction was found to have more of zinc than lead as determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy indicating the translocation of these metals from media to the cells. However, the intracellular translocation of zinc is affected by the presence of lead in the media. Expression of the zntA gene in bacteria grown in the presence of ZnSO4 was also studied and the molecular analysis results correlate with spectroscopic observations.



Introduction

Heavy metal pollution causes many genetic problems and has been a great threat around the world. The need for the development of efficient and economic ways for the degradation of these heavy metals is of top priority in the attempts to clean our environment. Use of microorganisms which have metal-resistant capacity in metal polluted areas reduces the metal bioavailability and helps in the bioremediation of the soils (Ji and Silver 1995). These microorganisms possess different types of metal-resistant mechanisms like intra- and extra-cellular metal sequestration, metal efflux pumps, metal reduction and production of metal cheaters (Nies 1992, 1999; Rosen 1996). In the post-genomic era, molecular biological approaches based on genome sequences help to study the different genes and proteins that play a role in the degradation of these heavy metals.

E. coli, the most common bacterium found in contaminated soil is known to have many metal degradative properties. The first Zn(II)-translocating P-type ATPase has been identified as the product of zntA, a potential gene identified after sequencing of the E. coli genome (Rensing et al. 1997). This soft metal-translocating P1-type ATPase confers resistance to Pb(II), Cd(II), and Zn(II).

Although the functional characterization of zntA gene in E. coli by gene disruption (Rensing et al. 1997; Wang et al. 2012) has been reported, functional analysis in the native E. coli isolates of the sewage samples with the aim to screen and identify an efficient bioremediating strain has not been reported so far. In this study, we report the screening and functional characterization of E. coli isolates from sewage sample. Several genes and proteins including zntA have been reported to play a role in zinc influx and efflux machinery of the bacteria. However, the discrete behavior of the individual genes/proteins under specific conditions, especially when zinc is present along with other heavy metals in the growth media is not studied. We describe here the results of our attempt to study the translocation of zinc when it is present alone as well as in combination with lead in the growth environment of E. coli.


