
Abstract

This study investigated simultaneous heavy metals removal and anthracene biodegradation by Rhodococcus opacus at different initial anthracene concentrations in the range 50–200 mg L−1. The heavy metals tested were Fe(III), Cu(II), Zn(II), Cd(II), Ni(II), and Pb(II) at 10 mg L−1 initial concentration: The organism was found to be well capable of removing the heavy metals along with high anthracene biodegradation efficiency. However, anthracene biodegradation rate by the organism was reduced due to these heavy metals. In addition, the heavy metals effect on R. opacus biomass growth followed the order: Cd > Ni > Pb > Cu > Zn > Fe. The total time to anthracene biodegradation increased from 144 to 216 h in the presence of Fe, Zn, Cu, or Pb, and it was up to 240 h in the presence of Cd or Ni. Compared with 70.2% (w/w) lipid accumulation by the bacterium in the absence of these heavy metals, a significant decline in the same was observed in the presence of the different heavy metals. These values were 41.2, 44.1, 52.1, 54.1, 58.6, and 63.1% (w/w) for Cd, Ni, Pb, Cu, Zn, and Fe, respectively. Field emission scanning electron microscopy integrated with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy of the biomass grown in the presence and absence of these heavy metals further confirmed a change in morphology of the bacterium due to the heavy metals. Fourier transmission infrared spectroscopy spectra of the biomass obtained during its growth in the presence and absence of the heavy metals confirmed the involvement of N–H, C–H bend, –CH2–(C=O), C–N stretch, C–H and O–H bending, and –C–Cl groups on the biomass for heavy metal uptake by the bacterium.



Introduction

Release of different pollutants into the environment has increased noticeably, thereby diminishing the environment quality to frightening levels (Kiran et al. 2016; Roy et al. 2015). These pollutants are known to affect both the living and non-living assets of the biosphere via numerous routes (Ye et al. 2013). Among the different environmental pollutants, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and heavy metals (HMs) are the most important because of their persistence, recalcitrance, abundance, and toxicity in the environment (Arul Manikandan et al. 2016; Titaley et al. 2016; Gopi Kiran et al. 2015; Samanta et al. 2002).

Heavy metals, such as copper, zinc, and iron, despite being toxic at a high concentration, they are essential for the growth of microorganisms in trace amounts (Baldrian et al. 2000; Hiroki et al. 1985). PAHs are toxic, mutagenic, carcinogenic, teratogenic, and persistent in the environment mainly due to their hydrophobic and water insoluble properties. Some PAHs are known to be a human skin photosensitizer, mild allergen, whereas some other PAHs are reported to cause haemolytic anaemia and nephrotoxicity (Bücker et al. 1979). Heavy metals are widely used in metal finishing, leather tanning, electroplating, nuclear power plant, and textile industries, whereas PAHs are ubiquitously found at wood preservation plants, industrial sites associated with petroleum and coal tar manufacturing, gas plants, runoff from asphalt pavement, and combustion processes (Kiran et al. 2016; Hadibarata and Kristanti 2012; Yap et al. 2011; Mahanty et al. 2008; Samanta et al. 2002). Therefore, industrial effluent containing these contaminants when released from the main stream affects each other’s biodeterioration and biotransformation by microorganism. For instance, heavy metals, including cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb), and nickel (Ni), are shown to adversely affect biodegradation of organic contaminants in the environment (Atagana 2006; Riis et al. 2002; Sokhn et al. 2001).

Remedial technologies, viz., volatilization, chemical oxidation, adsorption, photo-oxidation, and bioaccumulation, have been investigated for treating PAHs contaminated systems (Haritash and Kaushik 2009). Microbial biodegradation and biotransformation is proving to be more successful than these conventional techniques considering such issues as safety, cost, degradation efficiency, etc. Bacterial species, including Bacillus, Burkholderia, Mycobacterium, Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus, and Sphingomonas, are known to degrade/mineralize different PAHs into simpler non-hazardous metabolites. Organisms belonging to the actinomycete group are well known for PAHs utilization along with triacylglyceride (TAG) accumulating capability, which can be further transesterified for potential biodiesel application. Rhodococcus, Nocardia, Mycobacterium, and Streptomyces sp. are few of them (Kumar et al. 2015; Kurosawa et al. 2010; Mehta and Chavan 2009).

In general, PAHs biodegradation using bacteria, algae, and fungi have widely been reported in the literature (Sasek et al. 2003; Daane et al. 2002; Alexander 1999; Cerniglia and Heitkamp 1989). But till date, there are no studies which were found in the literature on simultaneous uptake of heavy metals and PAH biodegradation. This is very important from the standpoint of designing biological processes for treating a variety of pollutants in mixture. Therefore, this study evaluated the simultaneous heavy metal removal and anthracene biodegradation by R. opacus with a view to assess the feasibility of remediating aqueous environment contaminated with both PAH and heavy metals. Anthracene, a tri-ring PAH, is often utilized in dye and insecticide manufacturing and material coating industries. Uptake of anthracene via numerous routes in the body imposes toxicity to the skin, blood, intestine, and the lymphatic system, thus leading to tumors, edema, itching, and upsurge of fluids in tissues (Wieczorek et al. 2015). The heavy metals tested for this removal by R. opacus were Fe(III), Cu(II), Zn(II), Cd(II), Ni(II), and Pb(II). Furthermore, the bacterial morphology and accumulated lipid globules during the bio-removal process were examined employing field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDX) and transmission electronic microscopy (TEM). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis was deployed to identify heavy metal-binding functional groups on the biomass for their removal.


