
Abstract

Water scarcity is a major abiotic stress factor that strongly influences growth, development and yield of grain legumes in arid and semi-arid area of the world. Drought stress frequently occurs during the seedling stage and finally affects yield of faba bean (Vicia faba L.). However, the responses of plant leaf to drought have not been documented very well at the proteomic level. “Ga da dou” of the drought-tolerant faba bean cultivar was exposed to drought to examine the proteome changes of leaves. In this study, 2-week-old seedlings were subjected to water deficit by 7 days drought stress, whereas control plants were regularly irrigated. After withdrawing water, plants exposed to drought for 7 days and control plants at the same developmental stage were included in quantitative proteomic analysis using two-dimensional electrophoresis gels of proteins in combination with mass spectrometry. Over 300 proteins were detected by 2-DE, 50 differentially expressed proteins were detected by t test and 30 proteins were successfully identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF, in which 25 proteins were clearly downregulated and five proteins were upregulated. The quantified proteins were grouped into five functional groups, mainly regulatory proteins (46.7%), energy metabolism (23.3%), cell cytoskeleton (6.7%), other functions (20%) and unknown function (3.3%). Chitinase was upregulated under drought, suggesting that it was an important part of the plant defense system, playing an important role in stress resistance. 50S ribosomal protein was upregulated under drought, suggesting its role in protecting plants against stress by re-establishing normal protein conformations. The abundance of proteins involved in protein synthesis such as chitinase, Bet protein and glutamate–glyoxylate aminotransferase was upregulated under drought stress. These proteins could play important roles in drought tolerance and contribute to the relatively stronger drought tolerance of “Ga da dou”.



Introduction

Water deficit and dehydration is one of the most important environmental stress factors that greatly influences plant growth and development and seriously reduces crop yield (Pandey et al. 2008; Ceccarelli 2010; Farooq et al. 2017) and it is the bottleneck of agricultural development in many regions. However, very few plants have subjected to biochemical and molecular studies to analyze the mechanisms of dehydration stress tolerance. They showed that the intrinsic ability of plants to tolerate various environmental stresses was a result of different biochemical and molecular mechanisms. What is more, elucidation of the nature of these mechanisms would be an interesting area of research. Many studies on the resistances of plants under water stress showed that plants can produce a series of changes in morphological, physiological, biochemical and molecular aspects and showed drought-resistant ability (Alam et al. 2010; Manaa et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2011; Gupta et al. 2014). Nowadays, with the rapid development of modern molecular biology, the mechanism of drought resistance in plants not only had great influence on it in terms of morphology and physiology but also genetic engineering had increased understanding (Zhu 2002; Chaves et al. 2009; Cramer et al. 2011). Since proteins are directly involved in the plant stress response, the response proteins induced by drought have already became a hot spot in fighting drought and gene expression adaptation to adverse arid circumstances (Watson et al. 2003; Zhang et al. 2006; Farooq et al. 2009; Azooz 2010; Kosová et al. 2011; Xu and Wu 2016). Legumes are valuable agricultural, commercial and cold-tolerant crops that serve as important nitrogen sources for human diet, animal feed and farmland (Broughton et al. 2003; Boschin and Arnoldi 2011). Particularly, changing in proteomic expression during drought stress had been observed in legume crops showing differential regulation of mechanisms, such as chick pea (Turner et al. 2005; Subba et al. 2013; Jaiswal et al. 2014), soy bean (Tran and Mochida 2010; Das et al. 2016) and mung bean (Sengupta et al. 2011). They showed that the intrinsic ability of model legume plants to tolerate various environmental stresses was a result of different biochemical and molecular mechanisms.

Faba bean (Vicia faba L.) is one of the most important legume species for human consumption due to its high-nutritional value, high protein content and beneficial healthy properties (Amede et al. 1999; Abdelmula et al. 1999). Qinghai is located in northwest China and on the northeastern part of the Qinghai–Tibet Plateau with an average altitude above 3000 m. Faba bean could adapt to the cold climate and varied land conditions. Faba bean can product rhizobia nitrogen symbionts for itself and succession crop as nitrogen sources and it could change soil structure. In Qinghai, 80% of the faba bean is distributed in the irrigated agriculture region which accounts for only 30% of the total cultivated land biome; however, 70% of the total cultivated land is a rain-fed land (dry areas or semi-arid areas) where the planting area of faba bean accounts only for 20%. Faba bean uses more water and more sensitive to drought than some other grain legumes such as common bean, pea and chickpea (Mittler and Zilinskas 1994; Martínez et al. 2007; Awasthi et al. 2014). Drought stress can lead to serious yield decrease of faba bean in arid area and affects the efficient and sustainable development of agriculture in Qinghai.

It is imperative for breeding drought-resistant cultivars to identify the molecular mechanism that improves adaptation to water-limited environments (Zhang et al. 2015). The aims of this study were to increase understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the response to drought stress in faba bean using a proteomic approach. A combination of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-tandem time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) was used to identify the changes of leaf proteome in the seeding stage under drought stress. Since drought stress frequently occurs during the seedling stage, especially at the early stages, and deleteriously affects the growth of faba bean and reduces yield all over the world (Khan et al. 2010). Our research focused on seeding stage of the cultivar “Ga da dou”, which has a better drought-tolerant ability in our previous study (Li et al. 2015), drought-related proteins were identified in the leaf and possible roles of those proteins in drought-response mechanism were discussed. The objectives of this study were to provide technical support and theoretical basis for drought tolerance in faba bean and to explore relationships among potentially useful traits in breeding programs for drought tolerance.



Discussion

Proteins are an important product of gene expression, drought stress inhibits or induces expression of a large number of genes. 2-DE using the isoelectric point and molecular weight of different characteristics to separate thousands of proteins is a very good method (Celis and Gromov 1999; Görg et al. 2004) which has developed into separation of a complex protein mixture, and it is a core technology in most proteome researches. In this study, two-week-old faba bean seedling were subjected to 7 days dehydration by withdrawing water and total soluble protein were extracted using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. We identified more than 300 protein spots in gels of pH 3–10. About 32 spots of differential expressed proteins were analyzed by MALDI-TOF/TOF, and 30 spot proteins were identified successfully. We revealed that the isoelectric point and molecular weight of those differential proteins were focused on 5.0–6.0 pI (50%) and 30–50 kDa range (46.7%); it was clearly found in the gels. In all 30 identified proteins, 25 spots were downregulated and five spots were upregulated. The number of downregulated proteins was greater than upregulated proteins for drought treatment relative to normal water conditions. It indicated that synthesis of some proteins was inhibited to improve adaptability to the environment under drought stress. The expression of some proteins increased (spots 17, 27 and 30) and some new proteins were induced (spots 19 and 25), so the ability of plants to tolerate drought could be improved. In general, the protein levels tended to decrease in response to drought stress.

Regulatory proteins

The 30 protein spots were sorted into five types of functional category according to metabolic pathways and biological processes. Of them, regulatory proteins (46.7%) constituted one of the biggest categories. Nucleic acid processing was an important regulation mechanism, and even more nucleotide processing was a key regulatory mechanism. It showed in the cellular component enrichment analysis that some 30 different proteins were oriented in the ribonucleoprotein complex. ERBB-3 binding protein 1 (spot 20) may participate in ribosome assembly and promote cell proliferation and expanding organ growth; its expression was upregulated in normal water conditions but downregulated under drought stress. Similar to 50S ribosomal proteins, ribonucleoproteins (spot 3) were also involved in protein translation and synthesis; their expression increased under drought stress, it showed that drought stress promotes the protein synthesis system. A similar conclusion has been drawn that expression of rice ribosomal proteins was induced in adverse environments, such as high and low temperature (Kim et al. 2004). Heat shock proteins had characteristics of molecular chaperones and stabilized undenatured proteins and assisted in protein refolding under stress conditions. So that they could play a crucial role in protecting plants against stress by re-establishing normal protein conformation and thus cellular homeostasis. Hsps have been induced under various stress conditions (Wang et al. 2004). In this study, three heat shock proteins (Hsp) (spots 9, 10 and 11) we found, which had relatively reduced expression under drought stress, indicated that transport and new synthesis of peptides were decreased, maybe as a result of drought stress inhibiting protein synthesis. Chitinase was an important part of the plant defense system, which played an important role in stress resistance, bacterial resistance and resistance to pests (Cohen-Kupiec and Chet 1998; Gadelhak et al. 2004; Kalyani et al. 2013); spot 27 (class Ia chitinase) expression was upregulated proteins in this research.

Metabolism and energy

The second type of protein was those involved in metabolism and energy (23.3%). Being the most abundant proteins in leaf tissue, RuBisCO subunits have reported to be susceptible to fragmentation under drought stress. In those differentially expressed proteins related to metabolism and energy, ribulose-1, 5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) was the enzyme with the highest levels in plant leaves. RuBisCO was a kind of bifunctional enzyme and key to the speed of photosynthesis; it could catalyze carboxylation and oxygenation, playing an important role in the Calvin cycle (Parry et al. 2002; Andersson and Backlund 2008). In this research, the putative RuBisCO subunit binding protein alpha subunit (spot 8) we found might be a RuBisCO fragment and had its expression quantity cut under drought stress. The faba bean leaf photosynthetic rate might reduce under drought stress because of RuBisCO activity declined. In the report, RuBisCO expression in leaves was reduced under drought stress, and it was the main cause of declining photosynthetic rate. The accumulation of amino acids can reduce plant osmotic potential and enhance the capacity of plants to absorb water in soil moisture (Good and Zaplachinski 1994; Simon-Sarkadi et al. 2005). Similar to this result, the decreasing content in Rubisco binding protein at the leaf level had previously reported in legume under drought (Aranjuelo et al. 2011; Zadražnik et al. 2017).

Glutamate–glyoxylate aminotransferase (GGAT, spot 19) is a key photorespiration enzyme during photosynthesis, involved in carbon fixing, carbon metabolism, the catalytic serine and glyoxylate ammonia reaction of glycine and eventually generating hydroxyl pyruvic acid; at the same time, it plays an important role in growth, development and stress resistance of plants (Igarashi et al. 2006). Chlorophyll is an important pigment involved in photosynthesis in plant chloroplasts. GGAT mutation of plants showed phenomena such as slow growth and lower chlorophyll content (Versluse et al. 2007); in this study, GGAT (spot 19) expression was upregulated, illustrating that water stress increased serine and glyoxylic acid in plant metabolism of ammonia and light response, causing chlorophyll reduction of plants under drought stress. On the other hand, the results verified that faba bean plants had grown slowly and leaf chlorophyll content was reduced under drought stress. The main biological and biochemical function of d-alanyl-d-alanine-endopeptidase (spot 6) is the biosynthesis of the secondary metabolites carotenoids to mitigate and damage against reactive oxygen species, at the same time as the pigment involved in plant photosynthesis, chlorophyll, protection from drought damage. Moreover, phosphoglucomutase (spot 14) showed lower expression under drought stress, so that drought stress inhibits leaf sugar metabolism of faba bean and leads to increased soluble sugar content, thus enhancing the plant’s drought resistance, an essential reason for “Ga da dou” faba bean showing strong drought resistance. In addition, 5-methyltetrahydropteroyltriglutamate–homocysteine methyltransferase-like (spot 22) is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction involved in the synthesis of a number of important secondary metabolites in plants. It shows that in plants with abiotic tolerance ability, an important signal transduction material is formed under the action of methyltransferase (Zhang et al. 2012), presumably in response to drought stress after a methyl transfer reaction, thus improving the essential drought-resistant ability of “Ga da dou”.

Cytoskeleton protein

The third type is cytoskeleton proteins (3.1%), which were important in maintaining cell shape and internal structure in response to low temperature, salt and drought stress. The tubulin was a basic component of cytoskeleton in all eukaryotic cells and decreased under drought stress in this study. Microtubules were a major structural component of the cytoskeleton and participate in cell division, intracellular transport, and cell morphogenesis (Alieva 2014); it could be related to dynamic reorganization of microtubules and polymers of α- and β-tubulin heterodimers (Sheoran et al. 2014). It showed that tubulin alpha-2 chain (spot 13) expression was downregulated under drought stress, so we speculate that the drought resistance of the cultivar “Ga da dou” may be based on expression changes of cytoskeleton proteins, by regulating cell size to adjust osmotic pressure and showing strong drought resistance. Ndimba et al. also reported a decrease in abundance of tubulin beta chain in Arabidopsis under osmotic stress. At the same time, broken cytoskeletal structure could be a reason for the declining leaf conductivity and explain the physiological indices in determining the cause of the decrease in leaf conductivity.

Other functional proteins

The fourth type is other functional proteins (20.0%); spots 1, 7 and 12 were identified as hypothetical proteins. Spot 19 was identified as glutamine synthetase, involved in nitrogen metabolism enzyme, which can enhance photorespiration to improve the drought and cold resistance of rice; some research about rice root drought and cold resistance has been reported (Hoshida et al. 2000; Cui et al. 2005). The expression of this protein could improve the resistance of plants; the function of the protein in drought resistance and its effects still need further study and research.

Unknown proteins

The fifth type is proteins of unknown function (3.3%), spot 21 (GI number 217072432), the sequence of which is homologous to Medicago truncatula (alfalfa). In the mass spectrum identification database, no reliable results were retrieved, so that the database may not contain this protein.
