
Abstract

Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (Map) contains PE family antigens which are Proline and glutamic acid rich and may play important role as T-cell antigens. In the present study, the Map 1507 ORF encoding 9.7 kDa PE protein was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and cloned into E. coli vector pQE30 UA. The recombinant plasmid designated as pQ PE was transformed into E. coli M15 cells and induced with IPTG revealed the high level expression of 11.9 kDa His-fusion protein as estimated by migration in 15 % sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Recombinant PE protein was purified by Ni–NTA agarose chromatography. Polyclonal antibodies raised against purified recombinant PE protein reacted with expressed PE protein as well as with Map sonicate. The recombinant PE protein was also recognized by serum from goat with clinical paratuberculosis. The protein elicited significant delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) skin reaction in mice sensitized with Map. The results indicated that the recombinant PE protein of Map was associated with T-cell response.



Introduction

The search for M.a.paratuberculosis (Map)-specific antigens for diagnostic or preventive therapy has led to the discovery of several immunoreactive proteins. Many of these proteins have homology to other mycobacterial antigens.

Little is known about the structure, function, or immunological response to the PE proteins encoded by the subfamily of PE genes found throughout the genome of M. tuberculosis and other mycobacteria (Khubaib et al. 2016; Deng et al. 2015; Fishbein et al. 2015; Brennan et al. 2005; Fleischmann et al. 2002). These PE genes encode proteins that range in size from ~30 to ~110 amino acids, and most contain a characteristic Pro-Glu (PE) amino acid motif near the N terminus. Similar sequences are found as the N-terminal domain of the larger subfamily of proteins that contain polymorphic glycine repeat sequences (PE_PGRS) (Brennan and Delogu 2002). Studies using reverse transcriptase PCR and microarray analyses (Fisher et al. 2002; Voskuil et al. 2004) revealed that certain PE genes are expressed by M. tuberculosis. It has also been reported that PE 35 gene that was found in RD1, a multigene region that is absent in Mycobacterium bovis BCG strains, can elicit an immune response (Brusasca et al. 2001). Mycobacterium avium genome contains only a few PE genes and no PE_PGRS genes (Parra et al. 2006).

Parra et al. have shown that a PE protein of M. avium is a potent T cell inducer and capable of eliciting significant amounts of IFNγ in experimental mice model. Immunization of mice with a novel PE gene expressed by M. avium (MaPE) showed that a dominant T-cell immune response was elicited. Immunization with a MaPE DNA vaccine protected mice against an aerosol challenge with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, suggesting that mycobacteria expressed PE antigens with cross-protective T-cell epitopes. Hence the identification and expression of PE antigen that stimulate T cell response seem to be an initial requirement for the development of effective vaccines and or CMI based diagnostic. The present communication deals with the cloning expression, purification and preliminary characterization of the 9.7 kDa PE protein of Map in E. coli.


