
Abstract

Xanthine oxidase is a key enzyme responsible for hyperuricemia, a pre-disposing factor for Gout and oxidative stress-related diseases. Only two clinically approved xanthine oxidase inhibitors Allopurinol and Febuxostat are currently used for treatment of hyperuricemia. However, owing to their side effects there is a need for new non-purine-based selective inhibitors of xanthine oxidase. In the process of exploring novel xanthine oxidase inhibitors and anti-oxidants, we screened the culture filtrate of 07 novel species of Muscodor, a sterile endophytic fungi isolated from Cinnamomum and Aegle marmelos. Chloroform extract of M. darjeelingensis exhibited the maximum xanthine oxidase inhibition in the qualitative and quantitative assays. The IC50 of chloroform extract of M. darjeelingensis was 0.54 µg/ml which was much lower to Allopurinol but higher when compared to Febuxostat. 88% reduction in uric acid production was recorded by M. darjeelingensis chloroform extract which was similar to allopurinol. The maximum anti-oxidant activity was exhibited by M. indica against the gallic acid standard in the DPPH-free radical assay. Anti-oxidant activity index of M. indica was 7.7, which was followed by M. kashayum with 5.4. M. darjeelingensis exhibited a moderate anti-oxidant activity with anti-oxidant activity index of 1.63 in the DPPH assay. The present study is the very first report of Muscodor species exhibiting xanthine oxidase inhibitory and anti-oxidant activity together. Chloroform extract of M. darjeelingensis and M. indica stand out as potential candidates for isolation and characterization of the xanthine oxidase inhibitor and anti-oxidant compound, respectively.



Introduction

Hyperuricemia is a pre-disposing factor of gout which has been recognized as a lifestyle disease affecting adult population in the developed as well as developing countries (Kuo et al. 2015). Hyperuricemia results due to high serum urate levels which is attributed to it’s over production or under-excretion. The therapeutic strategies of treatment of hyperuricemia are by excretion of excessive uric acid or blocking the uric acid production. The later strategy appears to be safer since it involves the inhibition of Xanthine oxidase (XO), the key enzyme responsible for the production of uric acid. Till date, only Allopurinol and Febuxostat have been clinically approved as XO inhibitors for the treatment of hyperuricemia and gout. However, there is a demand for new non-purine-based selective inhibitors of Xanthine oxidase (NP-SIXO’s) owing to the side effects of currently used drugs.

Over last two decades, endophytic fungi have been well recognized as fountainheads of novel bioactive compounds possessing anti-cancer, anti-microbial, and anti-oxidant properties as well as putative sources of phytochemicals. However, exploration of these microorganisms for NP-SIXO’s is very limited as evident from the literature (Kapoor and Saxena 2014).

The genus Muscodor emerged with the discovery of sterile endophytic fungus Muscodor albus from the branch of cinnamon plant in Honduras (Worapong et al. 2001). Since then over 19 species have been added to the genus Muscodor on the basis of morphological, volatile gas composition, phenetic, and genetic makeup from Central/South America, Northern Territory of Australia, Thailand, China, and India (Meshram et al. 2014; Saxena et al. 2014a).

Till date, only volatile organic compounds (VOCs) produced by Muscodor have been explored and exploited for their antimicrobial, anti-insecticidal, and anti-fungal properties (Newman and Cragg 2015; Saxena et al. 2014b). Secondary metabolites of Muscodor species have not been explored extensively; there is only a single report on antimicrobial activity (Boparai et al. 2015). Hence, Muscodor species can be a novel source of new and diverse bioactive moieties which could be exploited by the pharmaceutical and the agrochemical industry.

Thus, in the present investigation, we have evaluated the in vitro xanthine oxidase inhibitory and antioxidant potential of non-volatile secondary metabolites of Indian Muscodor species.


