
Abstract

A cypermethrin-degrading bacterium (SG4) was isolated from the pesticide-contaminated soil in the agricultural field of the crop research centre of the University, and characterized as Bacillus thuringiensis strain, SG4. The bacterium degraded 78.9 % of cypermethrin (50 ppm) in 15 days when grown in a minimal medium. To understand the functional proteins of cypermethrin degradation in Bacillus thuringiensis strain SG4, a comparative proteomic analysis was performed in the presence/absence of cypermethrin after 5 days of incubation in minimal medium. More than 450 spots corresponding to different proteins were recorded by 2D electrophoresis. We report expression of 223 and 250 unique proteins under normal and induced conditions (cypermethrin stress), respectively. Identified proteins were categorized into different functional groups on the basis of their biological functions, viz., catabolic enzymes, translational and stress proteins, etc. Characterization of cypermethrin-specific proteins in a bacterial strain will help in biodegradation practices in situ.



Introduction

Cypermethrin belongs to a synthetic pyrethroid group of insecticides and is used to control insects of cotton and lettuce. It is a broad-spectrum insecticide and kills beneficial insects along with target insects. Fish are particularly more susceptible to cypermethrin. Resistance to cypermethrin (developed quickly in insects exposed frequently to this chemical) renders it ineffective in insects. It readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, enters the brain and eventually leads to nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurodegeneration in rats after prolonged exposure (Tiwari et al. 2010; Singh and Singh 2011; Pankaj et al. 2016). Cypermethrin induces the progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in adults. Degree of neuronal loss is considerably increased when rats are preexposed with low doses of cypermethrin during the critical period of brain development (Singh et al. 2012). Cypermethrin induced nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurodegeneration altering the mitochondrial function was studied using proteomics by Agrawal et al..

Proteomics has emerged as an excellent approach for gaining insight of physiological changes at cellular level (Jin et al. 2010; Meng et al. 2010) but relatively few attempts have been made to apply this technique to characterize resistance-related proteins in bacteria under pesticide stress. Till date no reports are available analyzing the physiological protein expression in cypermethrin-resistant bacteria in relation to susceptible strain, using proteomics. Proteome-based approaches are effective in making direct links with the pesticide degradation in natural environment. As compared to other biomolecules, proteins are promising markers as they reflect actual functionality with respect to metabolic reactions and regulatory cascades and give direct information about microbial activity than the functional genes and even the corresponding messenger RNAs (Wilmes and Bond 2006). Functional metaproteome from contaminated soil and ground water was analyzed by Benndorf et al. using 2D electrophoresis. Differential protein expression in response to imidacloprid in Myzus persicae (Sulzer) was reported by Meng et al..

In the present study, combination of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE), matrix-assisted laser/desorption ionization time of flight (MALDI–TOF) and mass spectroscopy (MS) were used to identify cypermethrin-resistant proteins in Bacillus thuringiensis strain, SG4. A majority of changes in proteins expression are related to signal transduction, RNA processing, protein processing and cypermethrin-degrading catabolic proteins. This study reveals that resistance towards cypermethrin in Bacillus thuringiensis strain is a combination of complex responses that are displayed by proteomic expression profiles of resistant bacteria.



Discussion

Cypermethrin is used widely against serious pests of most of the crops worldwide. Extensive use of number of pesticides has resulted in rapid development of insecticide resistance in naturally occurring microbiota (Meng et al. 2014; Foster et al. 2003; Slater et al. 2011). Development of resistance against an insecticide in a bacterial system is an universal phenomena. A comparative proteomic analysis of susceptible and resistant bacteria is helpful to elucidate innate responses and adaptive physiological changes contributing towards cypermethrin resistance. The goal of the present study was to identify and characterize cypermethrin responsive proteins in a cypermethrin-resistant Bacillus thuringiensis strain SG4 using proteomic approach. Differentially expressed protein (51 spots in gel) were observed in resistant Bacillus thuringiensis strain SG4 in comparison to the same strain growing without cypermethrin stress. Total number of protein spots was 223 in normal condition whereas 250 in cypermethrin induced conditions. Most of proteins were found to have important biological functions, providing a basis for understanding and annotating their role in response to cypermethrin exposure. Identified proteins could be classified into six groups: stress response, hypothetical/uncharacterized protein, catabolic/cypermethrin-degrading proteins, protein synthesis/modifications, gene regulation/transcription, energy production and chemotaxis-related proteins.

Stress response related proteins

Expression of functional proteins through signal transduction and regulation of gene expression might work cooperatively to maintain cellular homeostasis under various external conditions. In this study some chaperones were identified, including molecular chaperone DnaK (spot 2868), DNA repair protein MutL (spot 34), chaperone proteinHsc A (spot 2869), Grp E (spot 6559),with one homolog (spot 6421) and chaperone protein HtpG (spot 6401). HscA is a heat shock protein whose synthesis is stimulated under stress (Pumirat et al. 2009). It is known that oxidative stress can be induced by pesticides either by overproduction of free radicals or by alterations in antioxidant defence mechanism (Abdollahi et al. 2004). Catalase (CAT) is one of the essential enzymes in the process of reactive oxygen species (ROS) detoxification (Gao et al. 2008). Our results showed that predicted catalase activity was inhibited in cypermethrin-resistant bacteria. Inhibition of catalase activity could be explained by level of toxicity of cypermethrin or by the presence of O2 radicals during resistance development. Several studies have demonstrated that higher quantity of O2− radicals acts as catalase inhibitor, so it is possible that exposure to cypermethrin during the development of resistance, primarily induced the generation of O2− radicals which caused inhibition of the expression of CAT. Other studies have also reported inhibition of CAT activity after exposure to some pesticides (Ferrari et al. 2011; Velki and Hackenberger 2012).

Cypermethrin-degrading proteins

Metabolic pathways produce energy for the maintenance of bacterial growth under stress condition. Primary metabolic pathways (metabolism of carbohydrate, fatty acid for energy production) are needed to stabilize a new homeostasis in the resistant bacteria. Some enzymes like malate dehydrogenase, α-ketoglutarate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase/phosphatase, glycerol-3- phosphate dehydrogenase and formate dehydrogenase were down-regulated in cypermethrin-resistant bacteria. All the mentioned enzymes have significant role in tri-carboxylic acid cycle suggesting that bacteria might have taken up cypermethrin through novel metabolites for its growth. Such findings were not reported earlier in the similar studies conducted by Mishra and Shukla. Reduction in malate dehydrogenase activity in Clarias batrachus under endosulfan stress was reported by Mishra and Shukla and it could be due to binding of endosulfan or its metabolites with enzyme molecules and/or by blocking the enzyme synthesis.

Protein synthesis/modifications

Protein synthesis can be regulated by modifications in various enzymes at post transcriptional, translational and post translational level. Present study reports the involvement of different up and down-regulated proteins in these processes and mentions the up-regulation of polynucleotide nucleotidyltransferase (Match ID39), Threonine-tRNA ligase (Match ID 36), Glutaryl-tRNA (Gln) amidotransferase subunit A, (match ID 0), and RNA polymerase II subunit A C-terminal domain phosphatise (Match ID 2), whereas the DNA-directed RNA polymerase (β 1 subunit, Match ID 51) was down-regulated.

Gene regulation/transcription

Gene expression can be regulated at replication, transcriptional and translational level. Proteins involved in all these processes were identified in control and cypermethrin-resistant bacteria. Overexpressed proteins were DNA mismatch repair protein MutL (Match ID 34) and type 2 DNA topoisomerase 6 subunit B (Match ID 6). Besides these, several unique proteins were also expressed positively. Some important proteins were: elongation factor 4 (spot 2833), protein RecA (spot 2739), transcription factor TBF1 (spot 2852), elongation factor Ts (spot 2767), peptide chain release factor 1 (spot 2736) and cysteine ligase BshC (spot 2712) (Table 1).

Energy production/chemotaxis

Chemotaxis, a chemical interaction between the chemicals and bacterial cell surface receptors plays important role in energy production. A number of proteins take part in energy production and chemotaxis. In the present study, Phosphatise CheZ (Match ID 12) and putative glycine rich membrane protein (Match ID 41) were overexpressed in cypermethrin-resistant bacteria. Whereas translocase subunit Sec A protein (match ID 45) was down-regulated under cypermethrin induction in Bacillus thuringiensis strain SG4. Other prominent proteins in resistant bacteria were NAD kinase, putative arsenical pump driving ATPase, chemotaxis response regulator glutamate methyl transferase, ATPase synthase (subunit α 6437) and ATPase synthase subunit β, etc.
