




Discussion

This study aimed to produce a flexible and robust physical model of a patient-specific AAA to aid endovascular aneurysm repair education and planning in a time and cost-effective manner. The FDM 3D printing technique is a relatively fast and inexpensive way to manufacture an AAA model for a particular patient. Since CT scanning typically takes approximately 15 min , the total processing and manufacturing procedure could feasibly be done in less than 48 h. This is a significantly reduced time compared with that for lost wax casting procedures using CNC machined molds and other rapid prototyping procedures that require at least 2 weeks to manufacture a model .

The physical model was optimized by investigating the effect of altering printing parameters, and this showed that an increase in printing nozzle temperature increased the transparency of the Ninjatek Cheetah TPU material. At a temperature of 260 °C, bubbles began to form during printing due to excessive temperature, and this phenomenon created defects in the geometry. An infill percentage of 100% was associated with an increase in transparency, most likely as light only needed to travel through one solid wall of material (with the 100% infill model) compared to two walls (0% model) or several walls (20% and 50% models), all of which would attenuate transmitted light more. Despite this optimization for transparency of the Ninjatek Cheetah material, the result provided only fair transparency. A noticeable characteristic of all the printed models was that horizontal transparent layers tended to lie between layers of opaque material, where the nozzle had deposited the melted filament. A fix for this would be to use a larger layer thickness, however this would be at the expense of geometrical accuracy. Another possible way to increase transparency could be decreasing the cooling temperature ramp, or use a solvent vapor to partially dissolve the 3D printed sample.

While printing temperature and infill percentage only altered the geometry of the model compared to the CAD model by a range of around 2%, increasing printing speed had a more adverse effect on accuracy. Although an increase in dimensional error of around 8% was shown when increasing print speed from 30 to 90 mm/s, the printing time decreased to 14 h and 11 min for printing the AAA model. However, when comparing the average wall thickness error of approximately 8.5% for a final AAA model manufactured by 3D printing at 90 mm/s with a 14% error in geometry using casting techniques such as that of Doyle et al. , it appears that using higher printing speeds would be acceptable if print speed was a greater priority than exact geometry.

In terms of varying accuracy with section location, the most inaccurate area of the AAA model was at the top of the bulge of the aneurysm (7% error). Noticeable characteristics of this area are the complex curved geometry and the lack of PVA support inside or outside the model. It was a common trait across all measurements taken for the thicknesses to exceed that of the CAD model. This suggests that the material expands when deposited, and therefore it can be assumed that surrounding the material with a PVA support (which is always printed before the primary material when building each layer) must reduce material expansion. This expansion would also explain why the only other section to have PVA support absent both inside and outside (i.e., the very top of the model) has the second largest error (3.5%) despite having relatively simple geometry compared to other sections. To further support this argument, the under-bulge section was the most precise area of the model (0.5% error) and was almost completely surrounded by PVA support (see Fig. 6a). Nevertheless, the 2.5% error between the average thickness of the AAA physical model and that of the CAD model is comparable with the precision of dimensions measured in other 3D printing AAA studies and can therefore be deemed acceptable .

The 3D printed AAA model has good tear resistance to sustain performance for multiple repetitions of endovascular aneurysm repair testing. Silicone rubbers used for modelling AAAs have low tear resistances [25–28], which could cause problems when placing stent grafts inside the model, particularly for hooked or barbed stents, or for procedures with multiple repetitions on the same model. From the testing carried out in this study, it was found that the average tear resistance of Ninjatek Cheetah TPU is ~13–40 times higher than the tear resistance of commonly used silicone rubbers, like Sylgard or PDMS (see Additional file 1: Table S4 in Appendix for comparison). Thus, the tear resistance of Ninjatek Cheetah exceeds silicone rubbers while still maintaining good levels of flexibility with a Young’s modulus of 26 MPa, as shown in Additional file 1: Table S1 (Appendix). However, it should be also considered that directionality is important for 3D printed materials as they are not isotropic. Differences in printed filament orientation will likely lead to different material properties and may affect the value of tear strength obtained.

The 3D printed AAA model had lower cost (4.50 GBP per model), shorter manufacturing time (25 h 3 min) and higher accuracy (~2.5% error) compared to other methods reported in literature . The cost per model was in a similar range to opaque, rigid 3D printed AAA model (3.00 EUR per model) reported by Bangeas et al. . Barriers to more widespread clinical adoption of 3D printing are the high costs associated with the high-end state of the art 3D printing systems e.g. Stratsys Objet or Connex series (typically above £70,000 for their printers) are diminished, as the Ultimaker 3 printer costs approximately £3300.

Although the 3D printer achieved an AAA model, this study is still not without its limitations. The final AAA model was only semi-transparent, and had poor transparency compared to silicone rubbers with optically-clear transparency. Although objects placed inside the model (see Fig. 6b) could still have their positions identified easily and effectively; a stent graft would have to be placed inside the model to give a fair evaluation of effectiveness. Investigations into using alternative materials which have higher transparency and with material with higher compliance, would improve the model drastically. Additionally, biocompatible studies on the material used to make the model are also required if this model is brought into the clinic as a surgical aid when planning and surgery are taking place.

The STL files accessed for this study lacked geometrical data for the iliac arteries. Further study on examples with more complex geometries should be conducted, such as AAAs that extend into the iliac arteries or those with short neck distance to the renal arteries, as most AAAs are not infrarenal. Furthermore, next to the wall thickness other metrics should be analyzed as well, such as inner diameter and location of branch vessels to give a more comprehensive evaluation of model accuracy. With regards to model accuracy evaluation, the final wall thickness measurements were compared to the STL file and not the CT scan geometry. Therefore, there could be geometrical errors associated with CAD file processing, such as errors from segmentation. As for the wall thickness measurements, using scissors to cut the model into sections may have influenced the measurement accuracy in case the sample was not cut in the axial plane. In the current study this effect is below the measurement threshold (<0.01 mm).

Overall, with the levels of transparency, flexibility and tear resistance provided by the 3D printed part, the patient-specific AAA model could potentially be used for surgical planning for individual patients as well as for surgeons practicing endovascular aneurysm repair stent graft. Different types of stent grafts exist such as passively fixating, hooked and barbed, and stents that utilize bifurcation to restrict migration. Models could be 3D printed for each of these scenarios for practice in identification, and to familiarize doctors with AAAs that could be difficult to visualize with only a 3D computer image. Conversely, due to lack of similarity to aortic properties, the 3D printed AAA model would not be useful for endovascular aneurysm repair simulation, peak wall stress or fluid flow testing.
