
Abstract

Black gram (Vigna mungo L. Hepper), is an extensively studied food crop which is affected by many abiotic and biotic factors, especially diseases. The yield potential of Black gram is shallow due to lack of genetic variability and biotic stress susceptibility. Core biotic stress factors include mung bean yellow mosaic virus (MYMV), urdbean leaf crinkle virus (UCLV), wilt (Fusarium oxysporum) and powdery mildew (Erysiphe polygoni DC). Although many studies determine resistant varieties to a particular disease, however, it is often complimented by low yield and susceptibility to other diseases. Hence, this study focuses on investigating the genetic relationships among three varieties and nine accessions of black gram having disease resistance to previously described diseases and susceptibility using random amplified polymorphic deoxyribonucleic acid (RAPD) markers. A total of 33 RAPD primers were used for diversity analysis and yielded 206 fragments. Number of amplified fragments ranged from two (OPN-1) to 13 (OPF-1). The highest similarity coefficient was observed between IC-145202 and IC-164118 (0.921), while lowest similarity was between PU-31 and IC-145202 (0.572). The genetic diversity obtained in this study along with disease analysis suggests PU31as a useful variety for the development of markers linked to MYMV, UCLV, wilt and powdery mildew resistance by marker-assisted back cross breeding and facilitates the production of crosses with multiple disease resistance.



Introduction

Vigna mungo L. Hepper (Black gram) is an important source of protein for both humans and cattle. It is grown in the Indian subcontinent as well as in Southeast Asia particularly in Thailand, Australia, and other Asian and South Pacific countries. There is a great need for cultivating richer protein sources for cattle feed and human consumption which has lead to great interest in studying the diversity and pathology in black gram (Wani et al. 2013). It is also one of the central crop resources in Indian cuisine and occupies about 3.15 mha. On an average, the crop yields up to 275 kg/ha, despite the estimated yield potential to be about 844 kg/ha (Amanullah and Hatam 2000).

Studies have been done to delineate the genetic diversity of various pulses including black gram which succeeded in producing high yielding varieties in various regions across Asia. However, high genetic consistency and the absence of suitable ideotypes reinforce with deficient harvest and disease susceptibility has caused major constraints in achieving a higher yield (Vyas et al. 2016). Among various biotic factors affecting black gram yield, the main diseases which devastate the crops are mung bean yellow mosaic virus (MYMV), urdbean leaf crinkle virus (UCLV), powdery mildew (PM) and wilt (Fusarium oxysporum).

MYMV, is a whitefly (Bemisia tabaci) transmitted Gemini virus, which hampers resistant black gram breeding due to lack of uniform screening procedures and in numerous cases resistance is governed by recessive genes (Haq et al. 2010). In such circumstances, indirect selection employing molecular markers linked to resistance genes should be an effective approach as they enable marker-assisted selection (MAS) to overcome the inaccuracies in the field evaluation (Xu et al. 2012). Few attempts were made to search molecular markers linked to MYMV resistance in black gram by utilizing resistant sources like TU 94-2 and PU 19 through RAPD and ISSR analysis (Souframanien and Gopalakrishna 2004). UCLV is another virus which is ubiquitous in all commercially viable Vigna genus including V. mungo, and affects the crop in all stages especially in early stage which devastates total seed yield. In time, leaves become leathery and crinkled and lose the ability to perform normal physiological functions (Gautam et al. 2016).

Powdery mildew (PM) caused by Erysiphe polygoni DC and wilt (Fusarium oxysporum) are two diseases caused by fungi which affect black gram in high humid conditions and are easily transmitted through sporulation. They affect all the parts of the plants, however, leaves are affected initially and the morphology of the plant begins to change as the diseases suggest (Jayasekhar and Ebenezar 2016). Diversity among powdery mildew resistance was estimated against eight black gram (V. mungo) varieties from various geographic locations of Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh (India) applying forty decamer primers and generated a total of 249 RAPD fragments, of which 224 were polymorphic (Datta et al. 2012).

Previously, genetic diversity analysis among 20 black gram varieties was done by employing RAPD and ISSR markers indicating homology between all the 20 black gram varieties. RAPD markers are very useful due to their simplicity, low cost and high throughput capabilities (Kumari and Thakur 2014). In fact, RAPD technique has been applied to assess molecular polymorphism in mung bean (Datta et al. 2012), chickpea (Singh et al. 2014), pea (Handerson et al. 2014) and pigeon pea (Yadav et al. 2014). Studies among the 20 black gram varieties showed that WBU-108 and RBU-38 were highly divergent, whereas LBG-648 and LBG-623 were genetically similar (Karuppanapandian et al. 2010). Genetic diversity analysis was performed on existing cultivars, to determine whether a lack of genetic variability might be a constraining factor to improvement (Sivaprakash et al. 2004). Host-plant resistance is considered as the most economical and eco-friendly strategy for achieving disease resistance and yield stability.

Current study focuses on predicting crosses between high yielding varieties and accessions which can incorporate resistance to the mentioned diseases. Not only have we chosen the varieties based on varying disease resistance but also taken into account the economic viability of these crops. We carried out genetic diversity analysis among different disease resistant and susceptible varieties utilizing 38 primers. Here is an emerging need to identify nucleic acid markers linked to disease resistance especially in staple crops such as black gram for preventing food deficit in a burgeoning population. The marker can be converted to sequence characterized amplified region (SCAR) to identify the locus of interest by amplification with a specific primer pair it could facilitate marker-assisted selection for rapid evaluation.


