
Abstract

Understanding the genetic variation in germplasm is of utmost importance for crop improvement. Therefore, efforts were made to analyse the molecular marker based genetic diversity of 20 Annona genotypes from five different species of family Annonaceae. During analysis, a set of 11 RAPD primers yielded a total of 152 bands with 80.01 % polymorphism and PIC for RAPD ranged from 0.86 to 0.92 with a mean of 0.89. With 93.05 % polymorphism, 12 SSR primers produced 39 amplicons. The PIC for SSRs ranged from 0.169 to 0.694 with of average of 0.339. The dendrogram produced from pooled molecular data of 11 RAPD and 12 SSR primers showed seven clusters at a cutoff value of 0.78. The dendrogram discriminated all the Annona genotypes suggesting that significant genetic diversity was present among the genotypes. Proximate fruit composition study of nine fruiting genotypes of Annona revealed that A. squamosa possessed significantly higher amount of most of studies biochemical which gives an opportunity to fruit breeders to improve the other Annona species. Likewise, A. muricata being rich in seed oil content can be exploited in oil industries.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0520-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Annona, a member of family Annonaceae, is one of the largest tropical and subtropical families of trees, shrubs, and lianas with circa 135 genera and 2500 species distributed worldwide (Escribano et al. 2007). In genus Annona, merely six species, i.e. A. squamosa (widely cultivated), A. reticulata, A. cherimola, A. muricata, A. atemoya (a natural hybrid A. squamosa × A. cherimola) and A. diversifolia produce edible fruits. The origin of most of Annona species is South America and the Antilles, however, wild soursop (A. muricata) is thought to have originated in Africa (Pinto et al. 2005). The current distribution of important species covers almost all continents, with soursop and sugar apple showing the widest distribution, mainly in tropical regions. India is considered as secondary centre of origin for A. squamosa. Chromosome numbers of Annona are 2n = 2x = 14 and 16, except for A. glabra, which is a tetraploid species (2n = 4x = 28).

The pulp of Annonas is rich in minerals and vitamins (Gyamfi et al. 2011) and also a potential source of dietary fibre (up to 50 % w/w dry basis). High nutritive value of A. cherimola is due to fatty acids, edible fibres, carbohydrates, and minerals such as calcium, phosphorous and potassium (Lopez and Reginato 1990). Annona seeds, especially A. squamosa contain good amount of oil (Mariod et al. 2010) which can be exploited for industrial purpose. In addition, leaves, roots, barks, fruits and seeds of genus Annona have been considered as potential source of medicinally important compounds (Pinto et al. 2005). Hence, Annonas, a versatile plant with multiple use, are hardy and deciduous in nature, very easy to cultivate with minimum inputs, require comparatively little care and do not suffer from serious pests and diseases.

Fruits of A. squamosa and A. muricata occupy a promising position in today’s fruit market due to high demand by the processing industries (Santos et al. 2011). Though, their cultivation is still in incipient stages of domestication (Zonneveld et al. 2012). The genetic resources and plant diversity of outcrossing tropical tree species including Annonas are being eroded due to modernization of agriculture and land use changes. Hence, genetic resources of edible Annonas are exclusively present in situ, i.e. on farm, in home gardens/orchards and/or in natural populations.

Measuring genetic diversity is a mean for ranking the accessions for their use in breeding program. However, very few efforts have been carried out to identify diverse germplasm of Annonas. High variability among Annona population exists due to protogynous basis cross-pollination. In the past, morphological traits have been used as tools to characterize unexplored potential of germplasm for developing high yielding genotypes with better fruit quality (Folorunso and Modupe 2007). But traditional morphological markers are known to be significantly affected by edaphic and climatic conditions, hence, are not trustworthy due to high environmental influence (Kumar et al. 2014). Therefore, it is better to analyse diversity using molecular markers.

There are limited reports on exploitation of molecular markers for diversity analysis in Annonas. Few of these markers are random amplified polymorphic marker (RAPD) marker (Bharad et al. 2009; Ronning et al. 1995), amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) markers (Rahman et al. 1998; Zhichang et al. 2011) and simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers (Escribano et al. 2004; Kwapata et al. 2007). On the other hand, information regarding nutritional value is of utmost important to select desired genotype for domestication in area of adaptation. Very little information is available on proximate analysis of Annona fruits (Onimawo 2002; Kulkarni et al. 2013; Boake et al. 2014). Keeping in view about scanty information of Annonas, efforts have been made to study the genetic diversity using RAPD and SSR molecular markers and proximate analysis of fruits of selected accessions.


