
Abstract

Indole acetic acid (IAA) is a plant growth-promoting hormone used in agriculture; therefore, its continuous production is of paramount importance. IAA-producing eight bacteria were isolated from the rhizosphere of Verbascum vulcanicum. Among them, Arthrobacter agilis A17 gave maximum IAA production (75 mg/L) and this strain was used to immobilization studies. The A. agilis A17 cells were immobilized in calcium alginate for the production of IAA. Optimization of process parameters for IAA production was carried out to enhance IAA production using immobilized cells. The maximal production of IAA was 520 mg/L under the following optimal conditions: 1% mannitol, 30 °C, pH 8.0, and 24 h incubation. It was determined that the immobilized cells could be reused (13 times) for the production of IAA.



Introduction

Indole acetic acid (IAA) is a natural auxin which is produced by plants, bacteria and fungi. In plants, IAA is critical for plant growth and development. Most of the bacteria isolated from the rhizosphere can produce IAA (Duca et al. 2014; Patten and Glick 1996). Many researchers reported that plant growth-promoting bacteria from different genera (Azospirillum, Bacillus, Enterobacter, Azotobacter, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, and Arthrobacter), Actinomycetes (Streptomyces olivaceoviridis, S. rimosus) and fungi (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, Ustilago maydis) enhance plant growth by the synthesis of IAA (Khamna et al. 2010; Reineke et al. 2008).

IAA can be synthesized via either tryptophan-dependent pathway or tryptophan-independent pathway. The indole-3-acetamide, indole-3-pyruvate, tryptamine, tryptophan side-chain oxidase and indole-3-acetonitrile pathways are considered as main IAA biosynthesis through a tryptophan-dependent pathway in bacteria (Spaepen et al. 2007). Forni et al. and Yadav et al. reported that cells of Arthrobacter species (A. sulfonivorans, A. sulfureus, A. globiformis, A. nicotianae, A. crystallopoietes) produced IAA in the culture medium when precursor l-tryptophan was present in the medium. However, some bacteria have the tryptophan-independent pathway (starting from indole or indole-3-glycerol phosphate) to produce IAA (Arora and Bae 2014; Arora et al. 2015a).

Immobilized biocatalysts are widely used to produce different types of products and enzymes. They provide many benefits, such as higher stability, lower operational costs, continuous use of the biocatalysts, higher resistance to contamination, easier separation from the production medium and enhanced reaction yield (Kurbanoglu et al. 2010a, b; Okay et al. 2013). Different support materials (carrageenan, polyurethane, polyethylene glycol, and alginate) have been suggested for cell immobilization. Among them, sodium alginate is the most commonly used system because it is a rapid, nontoxic, low cost, and an easy method (Singh et al. 2012; Silbir et al. 2014; Yewale et al. 2016).

According to our knowledge, there is no earlier study using Ca-alginate immobilized A. agilis cells for IAA production. Considering the economic importance of IAA, this study aimed to continuous production of IAA with immobilized cells of A. agilis A17.


