
Abstract

Aspergillus niger is an important microorganism that has been used for decades to produce extracellular enzymes. In this study, a novel Aspergillus niger strain integrated with a eukaryotic expression vector harboring the gpd-Shi promoter of shiitake mushrooms and cellulase gene of Ampullaria gigas Spix was engineered to improve cellulase production for the achievement of highly efficient saccharification of agricultural residues. In one strain, designated ACShi27, which exhibited the highest total cellulase expression, total cellulase, endoglucanase, exoglucanase, and xylanase expression levels were 1.73, 16.23, 17.73, and 150.83 U ml−1, respectively; these values were 14.5, 22.3, 24.6, and 17.3% higher than those of the wild-type Aspergillus niger M85 using wheat bran as an induction substrate. Production of cellulases and xylanase by solid-state fermentation followed by in situ saccharification of ACShi27 was investigated with alkaline-pretreated rice straw as a substrate. After 2 days of enzyme induction at 30 °C, followed by 48 h of saccharification at 50 °C, the conversion rate of carbon polymers into reducing sugar reached 293.2 mg g−1, which was 1.23-fold higher than that of the wild-type strain. The expression of sestc in Aspergillus niger can improve the total cellulase and xylanase activity and synergism, thereby enhancing the lignocellulose in situ saccharification.



Introduction

In recent years, as the consumption of crude oil has increased, the development of renewable biofuels has become an important focus of many researchers; in particular, the potential applications of lignocellulose ethanol have been recognized (Kuhad et al. 2016). Lignocellulosic ethanol is advantageous over other potential biofuels owing to its capacity for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and lower cost of raw materials.

Conversion of lignocellulose into ethanol includes three essential steps: pretreatment, saccharification, and ethanol production (Limayem and Ricke 2012). During cellulose saccharification, cellulose hydrolysis can be accomplished using acid treatment; however, saccharification is most efficient when using cellulase and xylanase enzymes (Sukumaran et al. 2009). Such enzymatic degradation is thought to be more environmental friendly and produces fewer inhibitors, which suppress the subsequent conversion, further improving the efficiency of the reaction(Rosgaard et al. 2007). However, the high cost of cellulase has limited its applications in the bioenergy industry (Favaro et al. 2013; Klein-Marcuschamer et al. 2012). Multifaceted approaches, including the utilization of inexpensive raw materials, such as agricultural waste, and more efficient strategies for enzyme production, such as solid-state fermentation, could reduce the production cost of cellulase (Behera and Ray 2016; Moshi et al. 2015; Yoon et al. 2014). Improving cellulase production by microbial strains is also a promising approach to achieve these goals (Garvey et al. 2013). Multicomponent enzyme systems primarily contain endoglucanases [endo-1,4-β-glucanases (EGs); EC 3.2.1.4], exoglucanases [exo-1,4-β-glucanases (CBHs); EC 3.2.1.91], and β-glucosidases [β-d-glucohydrolases (BGLs); EC 3.2.1.21] (Garvey et al. 2013). EGs and CBHs synergistically convert cellulose chains into cellobiose and other oligosaccharides, which are then hydrolyzed by β-glucosidases to liberate glucose (Bansal et al. 2012).

Several microorganisms, including those from the genera Bacillus, Clostridium, Cellulomonas, Aspergillus, and Rhizopus, produce cellolytic enzymes (Vijayaraghavan et al. 2016). Aspergillus niger has many characteristics that are advantageous for industrial applications, such as superior fermentation capabilities and high levels of protein secretion (de Vries and Visser 2001). The BGLs from A. niger exhibit higher specific activities than those of other fungi (Dotsenko et al. 2015). However, EG and CBH are not highly involved in the cellulase system of A. niger (Yoon et al. 2014). Importantly, A. niger can produce other accessory enzymes of biomass degradation, such as xylanases, xyloglucanases, and α-l-arabinofuranosidases (Gusakov 2011). As the progress in heterologous expression, production systems of recombinant enzyme have proved to be promising platforms to efficiently produce industrial cellulase (Garvey et al. 2013).

Increasing the performance of CBH and EG in the enzyme system of A. niger may improve the activity of the cellulase system. Accordingly, in this study, a strain of A. niger harboring the sestc gene was engineered under control of the gpd promoter to improve cellulase activity. The sestc gene encodes a protein containing CBH, EG, and xylanase activities and has been shown to be effectively expressed in many other hosts (Cheng et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2003). We expected that expression of the sestc gene could ultimately enhance degradation of lignocellulose-based biomass. Thus, using the engineered strain, we evaluated the production of the reducing sugar released from pretreated rice straw by solid-state fermentation and in situ saccharification.


