
Abstract

The isolation of propiconazole (PCZ) degrading bacterium BBK_9 strain was done from paddy soil, and it was identified as Burkholderia sp. based on the morphological characteristics and biochemical properties combined with 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis. It has been seen that the factors such as temperature and pH influence the biodegradation process. The role of plasmid was studied in the degradation process by plasmid curing method. The PCZ acts as the sole carbon source and as energy substrate which can be utilized by the strain for its growth in Mineral salt medium and degraded 8.89 µg ml−1 of PCZ at 30 °C and pH 7 within 4 days. During the bioconversion process of PCZ, three metabolite were formed such as 1-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2-(1H-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl) ethanone, 1-[2-(4-chlorophenyl) ethyl]-1H-1,2,4-triazole and 1-ethyl-1H-1,2,4-triazole. The LD50 value of BBK_9 strain was determined with acridine orange which resulted in 40 µg ml−1 at cell density of 0.243 at 660 nm. Furthermore, plasmid curing was done using LD50 concentration and from that three plasmids got cured in the sixth generation. It was found that, cured strain was able to degrade 7.37 µg ml−1 of PCZ, indicating the plasmid encoded gene were not responsible for the PCZ degradation. On the source of these outcomes, strain BBK_9 can be used as potential strain for bioremediation of contaminated sites.



Introduction

The economy of India is largely depend on the agricultural production, due to the implementation of advanced technologies in the form of bio fertilizers, chemical fertilizers and different forms of pesticides have made possible to increase the quality and quantity of field products (Ramudu et al. 2011). Moreover, attention on the pesticides has increased during the recent times due to their versatile nature and various modes of action. Currently, triazole fungicides are the extensively used among the all fungicides for the protection of standing crops against plant pathogens. Whereas, the toxicity and non-target effect of azole fungicides are vastly under represented.

Propiconazole (PCZ) is a triazole foliar fungicide, which is used in the agriculture. The yearly intake of this fungicide is about 7373 g a.i. ha−1. The degradation of pesticides by microorganisms is gaining the extensive attention in the agricultural field and environmental microbiology. Interestingly, only few literatures are there which are dealing with the fungicide degradation by bacteria and in the previous years, many experiments have suggested that bacterial community are effective degraders of many different classes of fungicides: vinclozolin (Lee et al. 2008), tubeconazole (Nicole et al. 2009), captan (Megadi et al. 2010), benzimidazole (Cycon et al. 2011) and thiram (Sherif et al. 2011) and is necessary since PCZ biodegradation was not thoroughly investigated with the exception of Sarkar et al.. Moreover, previously available reports are mentioned that PCZ utilization by microorganisms is not possible because of its ability to strongly adsorb with the soil’s organic matter (Kloskowski et al. 1987; Ekler 1988; Woo et al. 2010). Similarly, laboratory scale degradation has been conducted in the different soils using commercial grade of PCZ alone or the mixture with benazone, dichlorprop and 2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid. It was revealed that the highest persistence of PCZ was found in agricultural soil since its traces were seen even after 84 days duration of experiment. (Thorstensen and Lode 2001). As per the technical information bulletin for PCZ, the half life ranges from low 96 days in a sandy loam to 575 days in a silt loam. Similarly, PCZ degradation by photolytic method in water is as long as 249 days. Thus, there is need of effective and cost friendly techniques which can degrade the PCZ from contaminant sites.

The isolate grown in respective medium is necessary to produce important metabolites which are precursors of degradation and it is also important to know that, potent microorganisms are likely to yield important new information on how the isolated bacteria is capable of degrading the toxic pesticide that prevails in the agricultural soil. Therefore, this study was under taken to isolate the potent microorganism which will prove their capability to metabolize PCZ under the liquid medium in given optimal conditions. Also, the function of plasmid and ability of cured strain in degrading the PCZ was investigated.



Discussion

In this study, we have isolated most impending candidate for degrading the PCZ from the fungicide contaminated paddy soil. It was evident that, the population of Burkholderia sp. was observed to be predominant in the paddy soil and the bacterium Burkholderia sp. BBK_9 strain was evidenced for its ability to utilize PCZ as sole carbon and growth substrate in liquid medium resulting 8.89 µg ml−1 (88.87 %) of degradation under the optimal conditions pH 7 and 30 °C. The preparative HPLC method came across as the most useful method for extracting and identifying the metabolites. Furthermore, culture filtrate yielded three precursors of PCZ degradation namely, 1-(2, 4-dichlorophenyl)-2-(1H-1, 2, 4-triazol-1-yl) ethanone (M1), 1-[2-(4-chlorophenyl) ethyl]-1H-1, 2, 4-triazole (M2) and 1-ethyl-1H-1,2,4-triazole (M3). Based on the fragmentation pattern M1 was identified with degradation of dioxolane ring from the PCZ representing the degradation product with molecular weight of 256. Simultaneously, M2 resulted from the loss of PCZ dioxolane ring and elimination one chlorine atom from the PCZ with molecular weight of 207. Metabolite M3 is identified by the loss of 1-chloro-4-methylbenzene with m/z value of 98. This experimental study would throw the light on plasmid role in the degradation. Moreover, plasmid cured strain was also an able contender in degrading the PCZ and it was clear that plasmid encoded genes does not play any role in the degradation process.

Isolation of pesticide resistance bacteria from the contaminated soil is the initial stage to understand the microbial population and to evaluate their tolerant capacity to the particular environment. Previously, Goda et al. isolated the five malathion degrading bacteria from Egyptian soil, among the all isolates Pseudomonas putida strains were chosen to conduct the degradation study due to their high efficacy and the important of this strain is revealed by repeated enrichment isolation method. The another research from united kingdom reveals the potential of isolation and screening of perithroid degrading bacteria which is isolated from the soil and in this study the potent bacterial strains were screened based on colony morphology which is having largest size (Grant et al. 2002). Paracoccus sp. strain TRP was able degrader of chlorpyrifos (CP) and 3,5,6-trichloro-pyridinol (TCP) and it was the supreme candidate for the degradation of both the compounds in higher concentration than the other isolated strains and the screening of all strains were evaluated by CP and TCP utilizing capacity (Xu et al. 2008). This suggesting the screening for the potent strain in the biodegradation study is most important parameter.

In general, Burkholoderia is a genus of proteobacteria which is having impressive applications in the field of agricultural, as a potent agent in the process of biodegradation, biocontrol, and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (Estrada-de Los Santos et al. 2013) and also reported for its potentiality for degrading pesticides (Hong et al. 2007; Kim and Ahn 2008; Pimmata et al. 2013). Degradation of many pesticides by microorganisms under the in vitro conditions is mainly temperature and pH dependent. In support to this study, Kim et al. have given the evidence that temperature will be the major key to degradation of PCZ. Standardization of optimized parameters has significant influence over any biodegradation process and also reported that acidic and alkaline conditions were not suitable for degradation experiments due to their ability in limiting the growth of bacteria (Phugare et al. 2012). Recently, Talwar et al. has reported the studies on optimized conditions in degrading the quinalphos. Interestingly, PCZ degradation is assisted by UV in the presence of titanium dioxide (TiO2) as a catalyst in aqueous solution under optimum conditions like pH (6.5), intensity of light (30 Wm−2) and constant temperature (25 ± 1 °C) during the period of experiment (Kaur et al. 2015). The physical parameters (pH and temperature) will have greater influence on the degradation of PCZ.

A limited information is available for microbial degradation of PCZ, in support to our current study, Sarkar et al. suggesting, P. putida is the most effective candidate for the utilization of PCZ under the liquid medium and also carbon source like glucose will enhance the process of degradation. Although, none of the PCZ metabolites were not reported. More importantly, metabolic pathway of PCZ by Burkholderia sp. BBK_9 is reported for the first of its kind. The white rots, brown rots and moulds were investigated by wood matrix method for their degradation capacity of carbon based preservatives, and it was achieved up to 75 % of degradation applied at 1.39 kg m−3 (Woo et al. 2010). Above mentioned two literatures suggests that carbon sources will be the major key factor in degrading PCZ under different method of degradation process. It indicates that influence of energy source will have the impact on degradation mechanism.

Correspondingly, Kim et al. studied the fate of PCZ in paddy soil lysimeter and possible metabolites. Namely, 1-[[2(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2-(1,2,4-triazole-1-yl) ketone (DP1), 1-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2-(1,2,4-triazole-1-yl) ethanol (DP2) and 1[[2(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-4-hydroxypropyl-1,3-dioxolane-2-yl]methyl]1H-1,2,4triazole. Further, carbon dioxide and bound residue were found to be metabolites of the PCZ. The metabolite DP2 was found similar in our investigation, this supports the present experimental results. Importantly, the dioxolane ring degradation from the PCZ is the initial step in degradation process. Vialaton et al. studied the photolysis of PCZ in pure water, in water containing humic substances and in natural water, it was revealed that PCZ was photo degraded and the dissolution of PCZ was found 25 % faster in natural water then the pure water. Similarly, the fate of PCZ degradation in canal water was tested under the laboratory conditions; which showed the dissipation of PCZ up to 80 % (Chauhan et al. 2008). Worryingly, the triazole fungicides are used more than the other group of fungicides but the studies regarding microbial degradation have been vastly under represented. Additionally, PCZ is major triazole agent, it is known to be highly persistent in soil and it will prevent the microorganisms from existing in the soil with long term effect (Yen et al. 2009). Importantly, the fungicides were never classified and characterized according to their mode of action, it indicates the problems for the assessing the non-target effect. Conversely, for the protection of biological functions and soil fertility, selection of fungicides is very important to prevent the non-target effects (Yang et al. 2011).

Previously, five triazole fungicides were investigated for their degradation ability in peaches field by photo degradation method. Expect PCZ, residual levels of cyproconazole, penconazole, tebuconazole and hexaconazole were found higher the recommended limits at preharvest time. Further, it is also reported that PCZ is highly stable and it will decrease in concentration during the plant growth by diluting effect, it indicates that PCZ is the stable among the other triazoles (Angioni et al. 2003). Additionally, triazole fungicides are globally used for the commercial purpose and most of them are known to be persistent in soil for longer duration and the studies over field have suggests that traces of triazoles will have impact on the soil fertility along with crop yielding (Bromilow et al. 1999). Triazole fungicide often shares a same mode of actions (Li et al. 2013; Satapute and Kaliwal 2015). Hence, Burkholderia sp. BBK_9 strain may also be useful in degrading the other triazole pesticides.

Plasmid cured strain was well distinguished for gaining of the resistance over PCZ in current study; it indicates that chromosomal genes are directly responsible for degrading the PCZ by BBK_9 strain. However, only few bacteria were isolated which carry an extra chromosomal DNA. The plasmid cured Pseudomonas aeruginosa MCMB-427 strain was found unable in degrading the dimethoate in liquid media. Suggesting, plasmid (designated as pDMD427) has direct involvement in the degradation (Deshpande et al. 2001). Interestingly, other plasmid cured Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain which is heavy metal resistant strain found potent candidate to utilize cadmium, chromium and lead indicating that it contains chromosomal genes in degradation mechanism (Raja and Selvam 2009). In case of degradation of fenitrothion, Burkholderia sp. strain NF100 is the supreme agent and it was investigated that degradation was encoded by the involvement of plasmids designated as pNF1 and pNF2 (Hayatsu et al. 2000). The slow rate of imidacloprid degradation was found by plasmid cured Brevundimonas sp. MJ15 strain. Interestingly, the degradation was archived up to 50 % lesser than the uncured strain. Suggesting, both chromosomal and extra chromosomal genes may involve in degradation process of imidacloprid (Shetti and Kaliwal 2012). Whereas, plasmid of Pseudomonas aeruginosa contains the plasmid encoded genes which take part in the degradation mechanism of methomyl (Kulkarni and Kaliwal 2014). Thus, the use of Burkholderia sp. BBK_9 strain for biodegradation of hazardous chemicals to make toxic-free environment is possible.
