
Abstract

Monsonia (Monsonia burkeana Planch. ex Harv) is one of the most valuable tea and traditional medicinal plants used in Southern Africa. In spite of this, there is no sequence information regarding this plant in literature. To provide understanding of the naturally occurring tea and drug-specific products and the key pathways for the biosynthesis of these molecules, we sequenced the leaf transcriptome using Illumina MiSeq platform and generated 2,590,652 paired-end reads that were assembled de novo into 45,450 high-quality transcripts. Annotation of these transcripts revealed best hits for homology to discover more than 17,800 functional genes and conserved domains. A total of 93 KEGG pathways and associated genes encoded by more than 90% of the coding transcripts are responsible for the biosynthesis of these life-saving metabolites. We validated and enriched the genes by GO annotation and linked this to enzyme-powered pathways through interactive network map. Caffeine metabolism, flavonoid, phenylpropanoid and terpenoids biosynthesis and xenobiotics degradation were typical in tea quality and drug therapy. The relatedness of more than 80 gene families encoding key enzymes was shown using unrooted phylogenetic tree. In conclusion, the M. burkeana leaf transcriptome gives insight into tea and drug-specific products, therefore representing basis in further investigation of the plant.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0563-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The emergence of next generation sequencing (NGS) has provided immense practical advantages for comprehensive analysis of sequences at the genome and transcriptome level, through widely accessible massively parallel short-reads sequencing platforms. Today, we are able to witness these rapidly evolving novel technologies that require automated protocols for generating sequencing libraries with effective and different approaches to genomic sequence analysis and to experimental designs. Thus, DNA sequencing and genome assembly, and RNA sequencing and transcriptome assembly remain to be ongoing projects as a corner stone for comprehensive sequence-based analysis that enables addressing of novel questions in most areas of biological and agricultural research.

Sequencing the transcriptome is a fast, cost-effective and viable alternative to sequencing the genome and provides a snapshot of expressed genes. Recent advances in techniques used in studies on gene expression and genome mapping evolved to converge on RNA sequencing as a comprehensive and efficient way to measure transcriptome composition, obtain RNA expression patterns, and discover new genes and gene features and accurate transcriptome quantification for single cells (Morozova et al. 2009; Wu et al. 2014). Identification of plant products that have values for human health using the transcriptome assembly is currently widely applicable both in the reference-guided and de novo fragments particularly in non-model plant species whose genome sequence is as yet unavailable or incomplete. In the current study, we embarked on de novo sequence assembly and profiling of a partial transcriptome for the tea plant, Monsonia (Monsonia burkeana Planch. ex Harv), Geraniaceae family. Monsonia burkeana is one of the members of the genus Monsonia (Touloumenidou et al. 2007) whose genomic information in the public domain is very limited; however, is predominately used as traditional medicine; and has increasingly received attention in terms of harvestable biochemical constituent properties (Tshivhandekano et al. 2014). This quality presents a case for its commercial production particularly for tea beverages that are well known for their abundant secondary metabolites such as polyphenols, theanine, and volatile oils (Rogers et al. 2008).

Naturally occurring compounds are increasingly used as dietary and beverage antioxidants due to their health and environmentally friendly features (Balasundram et al. 2006). This suggests that M. burkeana has a potential to provide a dietary essential nutrient elements required for human health benefits. The usefulness of special tea as well as the increasing demand for healthy tea beverages warrant its commercial production. This crop with such a potentially significant economic impact has not yet to our knowledge had its genetic profile investigated. Previous studies have developed transcriptomic resources and established information database in other medicinally important plants using NGS to identify and discover genes that take part in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolite (Shi et al. 2011; Gupta et al. 2013).

Owing to the lack of currently available genomic information regarding M. burkeana, it was incumbent to generate an initial dataset de novo starting with RNA sequencing just from one but most informative tissue in view of the practical application of the herbal traditional medicine of this plant. Furthermore, based on the primary interest to develop a strategy to discover the major genes involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites that may contribute to its commercial attributes, it was imperative to initially asses the viability and feasibility of the study before embarking on a comprehensive in-depth transcriptome analysis. However, we believe that further sequencing that includes additional tissues is required to comprehensively cover the transcriptome of this plant. This study, therefore, used the application of NGS towards characterization and profiling of de novo transcriptome sequencing events occurring in leaf tissue using RNA sequencing technology to address the foregoing concerns in M. burkeana. The Illumina MiSeq platform that generates RNA-seq short read sequences to add new data, was utilized. It is envisaged that this dataset will add basic knowledge by providing the first-hand transcript sequences of the leaf tissue and promote the basic understanding of the molecular mechanisms of cellular metabolism for future genetic and genomic studies on M. burkeana specifically in relation with secondary metabolites.


