
Abstract

Biosynthesis of plant-mediated silver nanoparticles is gaining significant importance due to environmentally safe ‘green method’ and it is an efficient alternative method. In the present study, silver nanoparticles were synthesized by using root extract of Glycyrrhiza glabra an important medicinal plant. The AgNPs are characterized by spectral analysis; the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peak of AgNPs showed maximum absorption at 445 nm. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) data show that the O–H hydroxyl groups, carboxylic acids, ester and ether groups and C–O stretching of alcohols have been utilized in the formation of AgNPs. The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) data reveal that the AgNPs are face-centered cubic (fcc) in structure. The size was determined by particle size analyzer and atomic force microscope (AFM); the results reveal that AgNPs were spherical in shape and the average grain size is determined as 41.5–46.5 nm. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) micrographs obtained show that AgNPs were roughly spherical and well dispersed with the sizes ranging from 10 to 45 nm ± 5 nm. The biofabricated AgNPs are extremely stable due to its high negative zeta potential −34.1 mV which indicates that the nanoparticles are polydispered in nature. The cytotoxic studies of AgNPs on human CD34 +ve stem cells in microcarrier culture reveal excellent growth at different concentrations of biosynthesized AgNPs. This is the first report of microcarrier culture of CD34 +ve stem cells on biosynthesized AgNPs.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0532-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

In modern research, nanotechnology is the current area of materials science. In medical technology, green synthesis of nanomaterials is gaining importance. The application of silver nanoparticles has a wide range, which gives scope for further research in the field of fabrication of silver nanoparticles and their compounds of ionic silver (Willner et al. 2006; Lou et al. 2006). Some of the very important applications of silver nanomaterials include antimicrobial properties, surface-enhanced Raman scattering effect and also catalytic activity (Li et al. 2006; Chen et al. 2005). It is already known that silver has been used as an antimicrobial agent for centuries, in the present days the repetition of antibiotics increasing threat of antibiotic resistance, caused by the exploitation of antibiotics. So, Scientists once again focus on the application of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) (Sambhy et al. 2006). Besides antimicrobial activity, silver nanoparticles have potential applications as intercalation material in batteries, as coatings in solar energy, in optical receptors, in bio-labeling, and as efficient biocatalysts in chemical reactions (Klaus-Joerger et al. 2001; Schultz et al. 2000; Hayat 1989). As the result, the biologists developed interest in the field of nanotechnology and focused on new dimensions of research in nanoparticles synthesis and their applications are emerging at rapid pace as therapeutic tools (Simkiss and Wilbur 1989; Mann 1996; Kotakadi et al. 2013, 2014, 2015a, b; Gaddam et al. 2014). Thus, the biosynthesized AgNPs have a wide range of significant applications in bimolecular diagnostics, competent antimicrobial, therapeutics, catalysis and also in microelectronic devices (Litvin and Minaev 2013; Schultz et al. 2000; Rai et al. 2009). Earlier reports on the synthesis of AgNPs by using synthetic humic acids reveals that the nanoparticles are very stable and can be useful in different biomedical applications (Litvin and Minaev 2013; Litvin et al. 2012). Since the last decade, regenerative medicine is gaining a lot of attention from use of stem cells in cell and tissue replacement therapeutics (Delcroix et al. 2009; Huang et al. 2009; Heymer et al. 2008). There are several challenges in stem cell therapy; to overcome these difficulties, the bionanoparticles were widely used due to their biocompatibility nature. Thus, these bionanoparticles are highly essential in biomedicine and also for evaluating their potential toxicity (Park et al. 2007; Huang et al. 2008). The nanoparticles are very minute in nature, because of their tiny nature more than 10 millions of them are ingested by each and every human being daily and they easily circulate through the body (Nel et al. 2006). As of now very little data are available on cytotoxic studies of biosynthesized silver nanoparticles on stem cells. The cytotoxicity depends upon concentration of nanoparticles (Braydich-Stolle et al. 2005). Thus, the present work was carried out to study the cytotoxicity of green synthesized silver nanoparticles at different concentrations on human CD34 +ve stem cells.


