
Abstract

In the present study, microwave-assisted, optimized, instant, Terminalia bellirica fruit extract-mediated green synthesis of colloidal silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) has been reported. The synthesized AgNPs were characterized by UV–Vis spectroscopy, FTIR, Zetasizer, FESEM, EDX and XRD. The characteristic surface plasmon peak of reaction mixture at 406 nm confirmed the synthesis of AgNPs. The FTIR studies confirmed phytoconstituents were responsible for the synthesis and stability of AgNPs. The FESEM, EDX and XRD analysis revealed the presence of spherical silver nanoparticles of mean diameter ≤20.6 nm with face-centered cubic crystalline structure. These AgNPs showed notable catalytic activity in reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol in the presence of NaBH4. The synthesized AgNPs showed potential antibacterial and antibiofilm activity against bacterial pathogens like Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Thus, these synthesized AgNPs can open avenues for the development of AgNP-based efficient nanocatalyst and potent nanomedicine in future.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0589-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Silver nanoparticles have found remarkable applications in the field of drug delivery, food industries, agriculture, textile industries, water treatment, redox catalysis, green housing construction and medicine (Jagtap and Bapat 2013; Kuunal et al. 2016). Several approaches exist for the synthesis of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) including; thermal decomposition, sonochemical, electrochemical and photochemical reactions, chemical reduction and biological route (Ahmad et al. 2010). Physical and chemical methods could effectively produce pure and distinct nanoparticles; however, these methods are quite costly and possibly harmful to the environment due to use of harsh chemicals (Kumar and Yadav 2009). This necessitates cost-effective, commercially feasible, non-toxic and environment friendly process for the synthesis of AgNPs. Biological materials such as microbes, enzymes, plant materials, etc., offer ecofriendly approach for the synthesis of nanoparticles (Velmurugan et al. 2011). Synthesis of nanoparticles using microorganisms has limitations due to its slow rate of synthesis (Shahverdi et al. 2007); hence, plant-based materials are receiving more attention due to its simplicity, ready scalability, ecofriendliness, cost-effectiveness and relatively high reproducibility (Iravani 2011). The key active agents in such nanoparticles synthesis were speculated to be polyphenols, flavonoids, reducing sugars, sterols, essential oils, starch, cellulose, pectins, gums, resins, lectins, etc. These biomaterials act as reducing agents as well as capping agents in the synthesis of silver nanoparticles (Gangula et al. 2011).

In recent days there has been a growing interest in developing nanomaterial-based antimicrobial agents to combat the emerging resistance to antimicrobial agents by pathogenic bacteria (Seil and Webster 2012). Ability of bacterial pathogens to form biofilms offers 1000 times more resistance against antimicrobial agents (Mah and O’Toole 2001). Hence there is a necessity to develop antimicrobial agents which have broad-spectrum activity and potential to combat against antibiotics resistant biofilms.

The present work deals with instant green synthesis of biocapped AgNPs by using Terminalia bellirica (Roxb.) fruit aqueous extract. This plant is wild and grows throughout the Indian subcontinent, Nepal, Srilanka, Malaysia and South East Asia (Ramesh et al. 2005). In traditional Indian Ayurvedic medicine, T. bellirica fruit is used in the popular Indian herbal rasayana treatment triphala. T. bellirica is used to protect the liver, reduce high cholesterol, and treat digestive as well as respiratory disorders (Latha and Daisy 2011). It has a well-established antioxidant potential and presence of polyphenolic compounds such as ellagic acid, gallic acid, tannins, ethyl gallate, galloyl glucose, chebulagic acid, 7-hydroxy 3′4′ (methylene dioxy) flavones, etc., as well as reducing sugars such as glucose and rhamnose (Nampoothiri et al. 2011). Hence, this plant was chosen for the synthesis of AgNPs. To the best of our knowledge, the use of T. bellirica fruit aqueous extract has not been reported before for the synthesis of AgNPs.

In these studies, the microwave-assisted rapid synthesis of colloidal AgNPs using TB extract has been reported. The process variables such as the relative concentrations of the extract and metal salt(s) in reaction mixture, pH, and time of reaction which controls the key properties of nanoparticles have been optimized. Furthermore, applicability of these AgNPs as a nanocatalyst in the reduction of 4-nitrophenol was explored. Besides biomedical application of these AgNPs such as antibacterial and antibiofilm agents against human pathogenic bacteria were also assessed.


