
Abstract

Application of multiple response optimizations using desirability function in the production of microbial metabolites improves economy and efficiency. Concurrent production of cellulase and xylanase in Trichoderma reesei NCIM 1186 using an agricultural weed, Prosopis juliflora pods, was studied. The main aim of the study was to optimize significant medium nutrient parameters for maximization of cellulase and xylanase by multi-objective optimization strategy using biomass. Process parameters such as the nutrient concentrations (pods, sucrose, and yeast extract) and pH were investigated to improve cellulase and xylanase activities by one factor at a time approach, single response optimization and multi-objective optimization. At the corresponding optimized process parameters in single response optimization, the maximum cellulase activity observed was 3055.65 U/L where xylanase highest activity was 422.16 U/L. Similarly, the maximum xylanase activity, 444.94 U/L, was observed with the highest cellulase activity of 2804.40 U/L. The multi-objective optimization finds a tradeoff between the two objectives and optimal activity values in between the single-objective optima were achieved, 3033.74 and 439.13 U/L for cellulase and xylanase, respectively.



Introduction

Application of biotechnological process to produce biofuels and value-added chemicals from renewable lignocellulosic biomass had received much attention in recent decades (Erickson and Winters 2012). The key step is the depolymerization of biomass polymers into fermentable sugars. The use of acids/alkalies can be cost efficient but they are not convincible due to their operational high temperature and problematic disposal of acid/alkaline waste. Enzymatic treatment of lignocellulosic biomass offers an efficient and cost-effective hydrolysis at mild conditions. This also avoids additional detoxification steps before successive microbial fermentation. The enzymatic hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass typically involves the conversion of cellulose into glucose, and hemicellulose into xylose by cellulase and xylanase, respectively (Zhang et al. 2014). However, enzymatic hydrolysis of lignocelluloses involves high concentrations of both cellulase and xylanase. Interestingly, synergistic effects were reported with cellulases and xylanases which anticipate the fewer enzyme requirements in the simultaneous saccharification of cellulosic biomass (Gonçalves et al. 2015).

Usually cellulase and xylanase were produced and recovered separately from two different fermentation systems. But hemicellulolytic microorganisms such as filamentous fungi produce cellulases and xylanases concurrently with different mechanisms of action (Jun et al. 2011). Trichoderma, Humicola, Penicillium and Aspergillus species are known to produce hemicellulolytic enzymes in a single fermentation system (Wen et al. 2005; Olsson et al. 2003; Ahamed and Vermette 2010). Trichoderma reesei is known to secrete large amounts of cellulolytic enzymes and also utilizes a broad range of carbon sources (Jun et al. 2011; Wen et al. 2005; Esterbauer et al. 1991; Olsson et al. 2003; Ahamed and Vermette 2008, 2010; Domingues et al. 2000).

Synthetic medium ought to be replaced with cheaply and easily available substrates to cut down the enzyme production cost (Manivannan and Narendhirakannan 2014; Liming and Xueliang 2004). Agricultural crop residues and forestry waste containing lignocelluloses serve as both inducer and substrate in the enzymes production and offer great productivity (Szengyel et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2010). Many cellulosic materials such as wood, waste paper, fruit pomace, bagasse, wheat straw, corn cob, wheat bran, aspen wood, waste newsprint, and waste paper sludge have been studied as potential substrates for production of cellulase and xylanase by T. reesei (Wen et al. 2005; Reczey et al. 1996; Liming and Xueliang 2004). Thus, there is a great interest in the utilization of cellulosic biomass as a major substrate for the fermentation medium. Prosopis juliflora a shrub of semi-arid and tropical part of the world could be used as a fermentative substrate (Shitanda et al. 2014). Due to its high cellulosic content, it offers a very good platform for the growth of microorganisms, especially actinomycetes, and fungi. Recently, we have reported the detailed composition of P. juliflora pods (Ramasamy et al. 2014).

Optimization using Response Surface Methodology (RSM) approaches was used to maximize the individual responses of cellulase and xylanase with process variables like carbon source, nitrogen source, pH, temperature and so (Srikanth et al. 2015; Wen et al. 2005; Esterbauer et al. 1991; Olsson et al. 2003; Ahamed and Vermette 2008, 2010; Domingues et al. 2000). But so far there is no report on multi-objective optimization approach to enhance the productivity of cellulase and xylanase simultaneously. Determination of optimal conditions by multi-objective optimization is more effective in certain fermentation systems which yield more than a single response. Especially, the fermentation systems that concurrently produce two products like cellulase and xylanase can be effectively optimized using desirability function at less cost. It also provides more information like the optimal composition of a medium which offers higher yields of desirables than using response surface designs (Kanaga et al. 2016).

In the present work, the multi-objective optimization by desirability function approach was studied using a central composite experimental design (CCD) for obtaining higher cellulase and xylanase from T. reesei NCIM1186 in solid–liquid fermentation using pods of P. juliflora as a major substrate. Assessment of individual and multi-objective optimization analysis was also performed to compare cellulase and xylanase productivity.


