
Abstract

Lettuce is an important edible crop which possesses various medicinal properties. In this study Lactuca sativa L. (cv Grand Rapids) was transformed by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation with rol C gene. Transgene integration and expression was confirmed through PCR and semiquantitative RT-PCR. The transformed extracts were evaluated for their in vitro antioxidant and in vivo analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antidepressant activities in rats. The transformed plants showed 53–98 % increase in total phenolic and 45–58 % increase in total flavonoid contents compared with untransformed plants. Results of total reducing power and total antioxidant capacity exhibited 90–118 and 61–75 % increase in transformed plants, respectively. In contrast to control, DPPH, lipid peroxidation and DNA protection assay showed up to 37, 20 and 50 % enhancement in transformed plants, respectively. The extracts showed similar but significant enhancement behavior in hot plate analgesic and carrageenan-induced hind paw edema test. The transformed extracts showed 72.1 and 78.5 % increase for analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities, respectively. The transformants of rol C gene exhibited prominent antidepressant activity with 64–73 % increase compared with untransformed plants. In conclusion, the present work suggests that transformation with rol C gene can be used to generate lettuce with enhanced medicinally important properties, such as antioxidant, analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antidepressant potential.





Discussion

The use of the medicinal plants for curing disease has been documented in history of almost all civilizations (Gousia et al. 2013). One such plant Lactuca sativa is famous for its medicinal properties, such as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, analgesic and sedative-hypnotic effects (Fu et al. 2012). Complete profile of pharmacological activities of lettuce as well as molecular modes of actions can further elucidate the full potential of this important crop. The aim of this study was to enhance the production of secondary metabolites in Lactuca sativa (cv. Grand Rapids). To achieve this, lettuce was transformed with rol C gene by using Agrobacterium tumefaciens. PCR analysis confirmed the presence of transgene and semiquantitative reverse transcriptase PCR was performed to study the expression which measures the mRNA level specific to DNA level. It has been seen that the rol genes of Agrobacterium rhizogenes played an essential role in the activation of secondary metabolites in transformed plants. We also report some morphological differences that existed among transgenic and non-transgenic plants. Such features were similar in all transformed plants which show that these changes are associated with transformation and not due to somaclonal variation. Previously, similar type of growth reduction was observed in Lactuca sativa L. (cv. Lake Nyah) when transformed with Agrobacterium rhizogenes rol AB genes (Curtis et al. 1996).

It is well known that consumption of fruits and vegetables is linked with reduced risk of diseases. This is due to their high levels of phytochemicals that prevent diseases related to oxidative stress in the human body. Understanding the distribution of phytochemical profile in vegetables and fruits is of primary importance. So, all the transformed and untransformed plants were evaluated for their TPF, TFC, TRP, TAC and antioxidant activity by using DPPH, DNA protection and lipid peroxidation assays. A significant positive correlation was found among all enhanced phytochemicals and antioxidant activities in transformed plants. The phytochemical studies on lettuce have already reported that it contains a number of flavonoids (Caldwell 2003). Synergistically, these dietary antioxidants provide bioactive mechanisms to reduce free radical induced oxidative stress. The DNA damage and oxidative stress conditions are the results of free radical production initiated by imbalance state of antioxidants and oxidants. In our results, transformed plants showed enhanced DNA protection response due to the effect of rol C gene as compared with previous report (Harsha et al. 2013). The protective effect of extracts on DNA may be attributed to the presence of phenolics and flavonoids. These results are supported by the previous findings (Bulgakov 2008) which states that suppressed levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is as a consequence of higher antioxidant activity in rol C transformed cells. Likewise, light stimulated elevated levels of ROS were decreased in the rol C transformed cells as compared to the controls (Bulgakov 2008). Enhanced antioxidant activity by transformation with rol genes may improve the plant defence response by suppressing the oxidative damages.

Transgenic lines of rol C gene were investigated for their analgesic, anti-inflammatory and anti-depressant activities in rats. Hot plate assay is one of the most suitable and easy methods for the investigation of centrally acting analgesic involving spinal reflexes (Sharma et al. 2013) while inflammation process is biphasic regulating process induced by carrageenan. The initial phase (1–2 h) of the inflammation is caused by the release of serotonin ad histamine while the final phase (3–4 h) is considered by the peak volume of hind paw (Khan et al. 2009). Analgesic and anti-inflammatory studies showed significant enhancement with a strong positive correlation representing that they might share a similar mechanism at some level. Recently, the presence of flavonoids has been studied in Lactuca species and these flavonoids have been reported to halt prostaglandin synthetase (Hugar et al. 2010). Since prostaglandins are involved in pain perception as well as released in the inflammation response, it could be proposed that limited accessibility of prostaglandins by flavonoids might be involved in its analgesic effect and reduced inflammation. We also investigated the anti-depressant effect of L. sativa via forced swimming test that represents the pharmacological model and produces a state similar to human depression (Glory et al. 2014). In literature, it has been reported that treatment with antidepressants reduces the oxidative stress related to depressive disorder and flavonoids contain antioxidant property which is demonstrated experimentally by the rise of the plasma antioxidant status (Pietta 2000). Although, it has been identified that plants containing flavonoids exhibit antidepressant activity (Moallem et al. 2007), antidepressant effect of various flavonoids and phenolics contained in Lactuca sativa needs to be further explored.
