
Abstract

Bioethanol is an important oil substitute produced by the sugar fermentation process. To improve the efficiency of cellulase expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a eukaryotic expression vector harboring a single-enzyme-system-three-cellulase gene (sestc) was integrated into the S. cerevisiae genome by the protoplast method. Using PCR screening, RT-PCR, and “transparent circle” detection, several recombinant S. cerevisiae strains, capable of efficiently expressing the heterogeneous cellulase, were selected. The total activity of cellulase, endo-β-D-glucanase, exo-β-D-glucanase, and xylanase of the recombinant S. cerevisiae transformant (designated number 14) was 1.1, 378, 1.44, and 164 U ml−1, respectively, which was 27.5-, 63-, 24-, and 19-fold higher than that of the wild-type strain. The concentration of ethanol produced by the engineered S. cerevisiae strain was 8.1 gl−1, with wheat bran as the carbon source, under submerged conditions; this was 57.86-fold higher than that produced by the wild-type strain (0.14 gl−1).



Introduction

In recent years, with the dramatic increase in demand for petroleum, natural gas, coal, and other non-renewable energy sources has necessitated the development of solutions to the fossil energy crisis (Saini et al. 2015). Biomass-derived fuel obtained by converting lignocellulose into ethanol represents an attractive alternative source of energy. This process requires the application of three key technologies: pretreatment of raw material, saccharification, and fermentation. The saccharification process is highly dependent on the synergistic actions of cellulase and hemicellulase. One of the main components of enzymatic hydrolysis production is glucose, which may be used for ethanol production by the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Tiboni et al. 2014).

Wild-type S. cerevisiae possesses extremely low cellulase activity under general conditions. The bottleneck of simultaneous glycosylation and fermentation may be overcome by increasing the cellulase activity of S. cerevisiae (Zerva et al. 2014). Cellulase activity can be improved by two techniques: the first method involves the integration of a single cellulase system gene, e.g. cbh (Haan et al. 2013), e.g. (Baek et al. 2012), and bgl (Tang et al. 2013) were individually integrated into the S. cerevisiae chromosome. In practice, the degradation of lignocellulose complexes via the overexpression of a single cellulase system gene has proven difficult. The second method, which involves co-expression of multiple cellulase genes in S. cerevisiae, has been found to be highly effective in degrading the hard structure of lignocelluloses. Several combinations of cellulase-encoding genes such as Trichoderma reesei egi/Saccharomycopsis fibuligera bgli (Haan et al. 2007), T. reesei e.g. II/Aspergillus aculeatus bgl (Fujita et al. 2002), three β-glucosidase (BGL) genes and two endoglucanase (EG) genes from Aspergillus oryzae (Kotaka et al. 2008), Endomycopsis fibuliger bgl1/Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens end1/Phanerochaete chrysosporium cbh1/Ruminococcus flavefaciens cell (Rensburg et al. 1998), and T. reesei egII/T. reesei cbhII/A. aculeatus bgl1 (Fujita et al. 2004) was used to increase the efficiency of decomposition of recalcitrant lignocelluloses. Because it is difficult to maintain the expression of several cellulase genes at an identical level, the use of a cellulase cocktail should enable optimal decomposition (Yamada et al. 1978). Therefore, the development of an engineered strain harboring a single enzyme system that incorporates the activity of multiple cellulases would be extremely useful to achieve synergistic and efficient degradation of cellulose.

The conversion of lignocellulosic biomass into fuels by in situ fermentation is promising. The degradation of lignocellulosic material, composed of cellulose and hemicelluloses, requires the action of multiple enzymes capable of hydrolyzing the recalcitrant lignocellulose structure into reducing sugars. These cellulolytic and xylanolytic enzymes include EGs, exoglucanases, BGLs, and xylanase, which cleave cellobiose or oligosaccharide units into glucose and xylose monomers. The consolidation of several processes involving cellulase production, lignocellulose hydrolysis, and fermentation during bioprocessing is difficult, which leads to high costs of biomass production and low economic efficiency. Consolidated bioprocessing, in which these three key processes are combined into a single step, represents a promising alternative approach. The strategies involved in consolidated bioprocessing include the native cellulolytic strategy and the recombinant cellulolytic strategy (Lynd et al. 2005). The feasibility of consolidated bioprocessing using a recombinant strategy depends on the combination of fermentation and reduction in the reactivity of saccharification of the substrate (Walsum and Lynd 1998). To overcome this bottleneck, cellulases, xylanases, and amylases have been expressed in various S. cerevisiae strains (Katahira et al. 2004). In addition, engineered S. cerevisiae strains have been used for the functional expression of several cellobiohydrolases (Hong et al. 2003).

The single-enzyme-system-three-cellulase gene (sestc), isolated from Ampullaria gigas Spix, encodes a three-cellulase system comprising the endo-beta-1,4-glucanase, exo-beta-1,4-glucanase, and xylanase enzymes (Shujie et al. 2009), and was also found to be a multifunctional cellulase gene. In this study, an expression vector harboring the sestc gene was integrated into the S. cerevisiae chromosome using a PEG-mediated protoplast genetic integration technique. The characteristics of the extracellular enzyme produced by successful transformants were investigated and the activity of the three-cellulase system (comprising endo-beta-1,4-glucanase, exo-beta-1,4-glucanase, and xylanase) was studied. In addition, the production of ethanol was investigated under submerged conditions with wheat bran as carbon source.


