
Abstract

Five bacterial strains were isolated from the hemocoel of the greater wax moth larvae (Galleria mellonella) infected with the entomopathogenic nematodes: Heterorhabditis bacteriophora HP88, Heterorhabditis indicus RM1 and Heterorhabditis sp (S1), Steinernema abbasi and Steinernema sp. (S II). Strains were identified as Photorhabdus luminescens HRM1, P. luminescens HS1, P. luminescens HP88, Xenorhabdus indica and X. nematophila ATTC19061 using 16S rDNA sequence analysis. To reveal the genetic diversity among these strains, three molecular markers (RAPD, ISSR and SRAP) were employed. RAPD analysis showed 73.8 and 54.5 polymorphism percentages for the Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus strains, respectively. ISSR analysis resulted in 70.1 and 75.2 polymorphism percentages among the Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus strains, respectively. The SRAP analysis indicated that 75.6 and 61.2% genetic polymorphism was detected among Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus strains, respectively. The cluster analysis grouped the three Photorhabdus strains together in one cluster and the two Xenorhabdus strains together in another cluster indicating the phylogenetic relationships among them. The genotype-specific markers detected from the three molecular markers (RAPD, ISSR and SRAP) were sufficient to distinguish between the different bacterial strains tested and can be used in the future IBM program that could be built on the use of these strains.



Introduction

Xenorhabdus spp. and Photorhabdus spp. are motile, Gram-negative bacteria belonging to the family Enterobacteriaceae. These bacteria are symbiotically associated with nematodes of the families, Steinernematidae and Heterorhabditidae, respectively (Forst et al. 1997; Sheets et al. 2011; Ferreira et al. 2014). These symbiotic complexes are highly pathogenic for a wide range of insects and are, therefore, used worldwide as biological agents in crop control (Ehlers 2003; Goodrich-Blair and Clarke 2007; Del Valle et al. 2013).

Many symbiotic bacterial species and isolates are still to be identified or described. Several identification techniques are now available that range from total protein, isozyme profiles to DNA/DNA hybridization and sequence analysis of the 16S rDNA region (Akhurst and Boemare 1990; Boemare and Akhurst 2007; Lee and Stock 2010).

The availability of molecular markers such as 16S rDNA (Christensen et al. 1998), RAPD (Williams et al. 1990; Welsh et al. 1991), ISSR (Zietkiewicz et al. 1994) facilitates the development of phylogenetic relationships, identification and characterization of bacterial species.

The sequence-related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) system was developed by Li and Quiros to target overlapping coding and non-coding regions of the genome. Depending on the amplification of Open-Reading Frames (ORFs) using the GC-rich exons and the promoter (Li and Quiros 2001), SRAP not only amplifies the interval between genes and their non-coding flanking regions, but also tightly links to actual genes, which would generate a fingerprint of the coding sequences and permit easy isolation of these bands for sequencing (Yu et al. 2008). SRAP is used in genetic map construction, genealogical classification, gene tagging and cloning, population structure, genetic diversity and genetic linkage map of plants (Li et al. 2007; Zheng et al. 2010; Jiang and Liu 2011; Lu et al. 2012; Alghamdi et al. 2012). Furthermore, it was used to study genetic diversity in parasites of human and animal health (Li et al. 2009; Song et al. 2011).

In the present work, five bacterial isolates (three Photorhabdus and two Xenorhabdus) were identified at the molecular level based on the 16S rDNA region. Furthermore, the genetic polymorphism among the five bacterial isolates was investigated at the molecular levels using RAPD, ISSR and SRAP analyses. The obtained data were used to construct the phylogenetic tree. The genotype-specific markers were also determined.


