
Abstract

Cost-effective, fibrinolytic agents possessing least or no antigenic properties are much in demand for their prospective use as clot busters in thrombolytic therapy. The present communication explores the potential of 22 endophytic Botryosphaeria species isolated from stem of Aegle marmelos for their fibrinolytic potential. Only nine fungal isolates exhibited proteolytic activity out of which only four possessed plasminogen-independent fibrinolytic activity. The endophytic fungal isolate #1088 AMSTITYEL showed maximum in vitro proteolytic and fibrinolytic activity with a halo formation of 153.86 and 113.04 mm2, respectively. The partially purified protein exhibited a fibrinolytic activity equivalent to 6.51 U/ml of plasmin. SDS–PAGE of the dialysed fraction of #1088 AMSTITYEL resolved into six bands ranging from 26 to 80 kDa. Fibrin zymogram exhibited that a single band of molecular size ~80 KDa possessing the fibrinolytic activity. Furthermore, the bioactive isolate #1088 AMSTITYEL was identified as Lasiodiplodia pseudotheobromae using classical and molecular taxonomic tools.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0428-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Blood clots are formed as a preventive response of the human body to avoid excessive bleeding at the site of injuries and wounds (Raafat et al. 2012). Fibrin is the major protein involved in blood clot formation, which is formed from its precursor fibrinogen by the enzymatic action of thrombin (EC 3.2.21.5) and is further lysed by plasmin (EC 3.4.21.7) (Kim et al. 1996). Under normal condition, blood clot formation and its dissolution are meticulously regulated by the biological system; however, impairment in this doctrine mechanism leads to thrombosis where the insoluble blood clots do not get hydrolysed and adhere to the wall of the blood vessels ultimately resulting in cardiovascular disorders (CVDs), such as myocardial infarction, high blood pressure, ischemic heart disease, stroke, and so on (Simkhada et al. 2010). These CVDs toll over 18 million lives annually and are expected to rise to 23.6 million by 2030 (Mander et al. 2011). The current armamentarium of drugs involved in thrombolytic therapy involves intravenous administration of streptokinase and urokinase, which instantly opens up the blood flow caused due to fibrin blockage, thus reducing the chances of morbidity and mortality (Raafat et al. 2012; Kim et al. 1996). Based on their mechanism of action, thrombolytic drugs are divided in two types: the former is plasminogen activators and urokinase, which converts dormant plasminogen into active plasmin that hydrolyses the fibrin clot and the latter one is plasmin-like proteins that directly hydrolyse the blood clots (Simkhada et al. 2010). Despite their widespread use, these drugs suffer certain shortcomings, such as low specificity to fibrin, internal bleeding, short half-life and cost effectiveness (Wu et al. 2009b). Therefore, there has been a continual search for safer and cost-effective fibrinolytic agent from diverse sources. To date, fibrinolytic agents have been isolated and characterised from different sources, including plants, animals, microbes and fermented foods (Deng et al. 2010; Choi et al. 2011). Microbes are considers as a lucrative source of fibrinolytic agents due to their diverse biochemical nature, feasibility of mass culture and ease in genetic manipulation. Hence, over the last two decades, fibrinolytic enzymes have been successfully discovered from microbial sources, such as bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi (Peng et al. 2005; Wu et al. 2009b; Mander et al. 2011).

Endophytic fungi are special group of microorganisms residing within the plants, which play an important role in defending the host plant against stresses, such as pathogenic invasions and drought. The genetic recombination of the endophytes with the host plant enables them to mimic the biological properties of their host and produce analogous bioactive metabolites. Production of an anticancer compound ‘taxol’ in the culture broth of Taxomyces andrenae isolated from Taxus baccata is the best example of it (Daisy and Strobel 2003; Zhang et al. 2006). Exploration of enzymatic properties of these endophytic fungi is a novel and largely under-explored aspect, and there exist scanty literature on screening and isolation of novel fibrinolytic enzymes from these microorganisms. Endophytic fungi, such as Verticillum sp., Fusarium sp. and Bionectria sp., are amongst few reported to possess in vitro fibrinolytic activity (Li et al. 2007; Wu et al. 2009a; Rovati et al. 2010).

In this study, we undertook an in vitro screening program to assess the fibrinolytic potential of 22 endophytic fungal isolates of Botryosphaeria species isolated from the Western Ghats in India. This study is also the very first report of an endophytic Botryrosphaeria species exhibiting fibrinolytic activity. Fungal fibrinolytic enzymes may be exploited as a substitute to streptokinase, which is of bacterial origin and currently being exploited as a thrombolytic agent by the pharmaceutical Industry.


