
Abstract

Bacillus thuringiensis is a bacterium with unusual properties that make it useful for pest control in ecoagriculture. It can form a parasporal crystal containing polypeptides (also called delta-endotoxins). These entomopathogenic toxins are made during the stationary phase of the bacterial growth cycle and were initially characterized as an insect pathogen. Nowadays, the use of saturated two-level designs is very popular. This method is especially used in industrial applications where the cost of experiments is expensive. Standard classical approaches are not appropriate to analyze data from saturated designs. It is due to the fact that they only allow to estimate the main factor effects and cannot assure enough freedom degrees to estimate the error variance. In this paper, we propose the use of empirical Bayesian procedures to get inferences for data obtained from saturated designs, inspired from Hadamard matrices. The proposed methodology is illustrated by assuming a dataset to prove the model robustness. The comparison between the two studied mathematical techniques, based on mean square error values (MSE), revealed that Bayesian method (BM) was more accurate than least square method (LSM): for example, the results showed that 2002 and 2000.7 mg/l for experimental and predicted (BM) data were obtained against 2002 and 1991 mg/l for experimental and predicted (LSM) data. This suggested method could be generalized in several application fields in biological sciences.



Introduction

Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a spore-forming bacterium well known for its insecticidal properties associated with its aptitude to produce crystal inclusions through sporulation. These toxins are also specific and biodegradable; therefore, no toxic products are accumulated in the environment. Bt biopesticides are produced by fermentation technology. The fermentation is a process in which an agent causes an organic substance to break down into simpler substances. It is considered as a major step in industrial biotechnology and it is necessary to take under consideration the optimization of medium composition to affect the formation of a specific final product during fermentation process (Schmidt 2005; Singh et al. 2008).

A fermentation enhancement program begins by measuring product yield as a response to factors like strength of medium components. Nutritional requirement can be manipulated either by the conventional or statistical approach. Conventional methods, commonly used for a long time in industrial production, involve changing one independent variable while others are kept at fixed level. However, statistical methods are more recent and offer many advantages when compared to conventional methods because they are rapid and reliable. Furthermore, these techniques are useful for short-listing significant nutrients, and then reducing the total number of experiments, hence an important gain of time and chemical products. A systematic experiment was then performed by setting the independent variables according to a statistical design carried out from Hadamard matrices at two levels and delta-endotoxins produced by B. thuringiensis strain was measured in each batch. A statistical analysis was then carried out to interpret the significant medium components. Such approach is a useful screening process employed to identify the contribution of each medium component to the response of the system and thus allows for a reduction of variable numbers that need to be considered (Liu et al. 2008).

In this work, we study the significance levels of medium components for delta-endotoxin production using statistical design. Moreover, we present a statistical method to identify complex ingredients interactions, during fermentation process, with Bayesian network (BN) structure learning for specific conditions. This method discovers the dependency relationship between components which implies their complex interactions on heterogeneous data sets.


