
Abstract

Plant-microbial interaction in rhizosphere plays vital role in shaping plant’s growth and ecosystem function. Most of the rhizospheric microbial diversity studies are restricted to bacteria. In natural ecosystem, archaea also constitutes a major component of the microbial population. However, their diversity is less known compared to bacteria. Experiments were carried out to examine diversity of bacteria and archaea in the rhizosphere of bioenergy crop Jatropha curcas (J. curcas). Samples were collected from three locations varying widely in the soil physico-chemical properties. Diversity was estimated by terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (TRFLP) targeting 16S rRNA gene of bacteria and archaea. Fifteen bacterial and 17 archaeal terminal restriction fragments (TRFs) were retrieved from J. curcas rhizosphere. Bacterial indicative TRFs were Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Acidobacteria, Verrumicrobiaceae, and Chlroflexi. Major archaeal TRFs were crenarchaeota, and euryarchaeota. In case of bacteria, relative fluorescence was low for TRF160 and high for TRF51, TRF 420. Similarly, for archaea relative fluorescence of TRF 218, and TRF 282 was low and high for TRF 278, TRF468 and TRF93. Principal component analysis (PCA) of bacterial TRFs designated PC 1 with 46.83% of variation and PC2 with 31.07% variation. Archaeal TRFs designated 90.94% of variation by PC1 and 9.05% by PC2. Simpson index varied from 0.530 to 0.880 and Shannon index from 1.462 to 3.139 for bacteria. For archaea, Simpson index varied from 0.855 to 0.897 and Shannon index varied from 3.027 to 3.155. Study concluded that rhizosphere of J. curcas constituted of diverse set of both bacteria and archaea, which might have promising plant growth promoting activities.



Introduction

Bioenergy crop Jatropha curcas (J. curcas) is a member of Euphorbeaceae family. Recently, it is promoted worldwide for bioenergy production, soil health improvement, climate change mitigation, carbon sequestration and socio economic improvement (Islam et al. 2014). J. curcas survives under limited nutrient and harsh environmental condition. J. curcas adapt to grow under salt stress, high temperature. Because of these growth abilities, J. curcas has been used for soil reclamation. Its rhizosphere harbors myriad of microbial community those regulate nutrient uptake and adaptation to extreme environment. Many heterotrophs, N2 fixers, and P solubilizers inhabit in its rhizosphere (Mohanty et al. 2012). Rhizosphere of Jatropha possesses diverse group of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), actinomycetes, and many plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) (Pérez and Schenck 1990). Plant growth-promoting gamma-proteobacterium, Enterobacter cancerogenus has also been isolated from the rhizosphere of J. curcas. These microbial species produce growth hormone ACC (1-amino-cyclopropane-1-carboxylate) deaminase, phytases, auxin, IAA (indole acetic acid), siderophores, ammonia and solubilize phosphate. Like J. curcas, most of the plants have numerous PGPRs in their rhizosphere, but they often fail to grow under challenging environment. However, it is unclear how J. curcas adapts to extreme (water and nutrient limitation) conditions. We hypothesize that J. curcas harbors certain microbial groups in its rhizosphere which might have different plant-microbial interaction than commonly known. Possibly archaea predominate in J. curcas rhizosphere, because archaea are known to occur in challenging environments. The present study was undertaken to reveal the diversity of bacteria and archaea in the rhizosphere of J. curcas.



Discussion

Bacterial species prevalent in rhizosphere of J. curcas were mainly belonged to Actinobacteria, Verrumicrobia, and Firmicutes. Actinobacteria has been found in rhizosphere of many plants, including cereal crops such as wheat (Zhao et al. 2012; Mingma et al. 2014). Streptomyces are major species of Actinobacteria, that are commonly found in roots of crops and terrestrial plants (Liu et al. 2015). Actinomycetes has been isolated from the root of the oil-seed plant (Xing et al. 2012). Nocardioides panzhihuaensis has been reported from the roots of J. curcas (Qin et al. 2012). However, information regarding the prevalence of Firmicutes or Clostridia in the rhizosphere of J. curcas is limited. TRF fragments representing Verrumicrobia, and Chloroflexi were retrieved from the rhizosphere of J. curcas. In a study, microbial diversity of a native waste-land and planted with J. curcas was evaluated. There was a striking increase in the members of Proteobacteria as well as of Bacteroidetes in Jatropha planted soil than the native soil. In contrast, there was a decline in the Acidobacteria and Chloroflexi community in the fields planted with J. curcas.

T-RFLP also indicated the presence of Bifidobacteria sp, Sphingomonas, Bacillus subtillis, Clostridium, and Exiguobacterium in rhizosphere of J. curcas. The least abundant species were Dehalogenomonas, Acidobacteria, Acetobacteria, Verrumicrobia. Bifidobacteria comes under Acenitobacter and exhibits PGPR activities. Acinetobacter are plant growth promoters (Huddedar et al. 2002) and they produce phyto hormones (Fiester and Actis 2013), solubilize phosphate (Rokhbakhsh-Zamin et al. 2011), and also produce siderophores (Higgins et al. 2012). Acinetobacter suppresses phytopathogenic fungi, such as Cryphonectria parasitica, Phytophthora capsici, and Rhizoctonia solani (Maindad et al. 2014). TRFs representative of Sphingomonas were also found in the rhizospheric samples. These organisms has been found in the rhizosphere of rice (Shahi et al. 2013), apple (Caputo et al. 2015), and ginseng (Singh et al. 2015). Sphingomonas promotes plant growth by producing growth hormones, gibberllins and indole acetic acid (Myresiotis et al. 2012). Bacillus subtilis, belongs to the phylum Firmicutes, has been found in a wide variety of environments and plants. Bacillus sp produces phytohormones and exhibits ACC deaminase activity (Bharti et al. 2013). Exiguobacteria are gram positive, rod shaped, yellow pigmented bacterium has been found in rhizospheric soil of apple. These bacteria produce siderophore for better nutrient uptake. These strains also produce hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and volatile compounds to protect plants from pathogens like Rhizoctonia solani, Sclerotium rolfsii, Pythium and Fusarium oxysporum (Selvakumar et al. 2009).

There were 17 archaeal TRFs found in the rhizosphere of J. curcas and out of which 11 were affiliated to uncultured archaea. Three TRFs were affiliated to Crenarchaea and other three TRFs were affiliated to Euryarchaea. Archaea has been found in the rhizosphere of different terrestrial plants but mostly were observed in aquatic plants. In temperate grassland pasture, the archaeal communities are mainly Crenarchaeota (Nicol et al. 2003). In flooded rice soil ecosystem the ammonia oxidizing archaea are abundant in the rhizosphere than in the bulk soil. The rice cultivation stimulates the abundance of both the nitrifying ammonia oxidizing archaea than ammonia oxidizing bacteria (Chen et al. 2008). A study on the microbial community of three boreal forest tree species (Scots pine, silver birch, and Norway spruce), archael species like methanogenic euryarchaeota belonging to Methanolobus sp. and Methanosaeta sp. were detected on the roots. In this study the most commonly archaeal 16S rRNA gene sequences were Crenarchaeota of 1.1b and 1.1c (Bomberg et al. 2011). Other TRFs represented uncultured archaea like, TRF93 (Crenarchaea), TRF278 (archaea of environmental samples), TRF 468 (Euryarchaea), TRF497 (archaea of environmental samples). Relative abundance of these TRFs followed the trend of TRF 278 > TRF468 > TRF93 > TRF497 (Fig. 2). Crenarchaeota probably were involved in N transformation (nitrification) in rhizosphere of J. curcas. However, further research need to be undertaken to verify the role of these archaea on N transformation.

The microbial diversity was evaluated through the Simpson, Shannon and evenness indices (Haegeman et al. 2013). Simpson’s Index (D) measures the probability that two individuals randomly selected from a sample will belong to the same species. Index, 0 represents infinite diversity and 1, no diversity. Bhopal and Noida had high bacterial diversity than Jabalpur. Similar values has been observed in rhizosphere of maize (Pathan et al. 2015). The Shannon index (H) is commonly used to characterize species diversity. It accounts for both abundance and evenness of the species. Similar results have been observed in the Brazilian Atlantic forest soil which is one of the 25 biodiversity hot spots in the world. In these sites the Shannon diversity indices was in the range of 4.12–3.57, ascribed to high microbial diversity (Faoro et al. 2010). Evenness measures relative abundance of the different species. Diversity was high in Bhopal and Noida than Jabalpur. Probably, soil N was related to diversity values. In a study, it was shown that soil with limited inorganic N adversely affected microbial diversity (Thébault et al. 2014). PCA biplot revealed that both Bhopal and Noida possessed similar microbial population. Organic C and total N was high in these soils than Jabalpur. Microbial diversity corresponded with the organic carbon and nitrogen content of soils. Environmental factors that influence microbial community composition and diversity include pH (Eichorst et al. 2007), organic C (Zhou et al. 2002), and available N (Fierer et al. 2003). The expression of microbial activities strongly depends on the organic C and available N content of soil. Soil organic carbon is heterogeneously distributed among different-sized primary particles, forming organo-mineral complexes that respond differently to the plant and environmental factors (Christensen et al. 2001). Microbial diversity of soils varied relatively with the cation exchange capacity (CEC). The capacity of the soil to capture the cations (for example Ca2+, Mg2+, K+, Na+, Al3+, Fe2+, etc.) is called CEC. These cations are held together by the negatively charged clay and organic matter particles in the soil. These cations are easily exchanged with other soil cations and help in microbial metabolism. Probably, CEC favored microbial activity and increased the microbial diversity (Taylor et al. 2002). Clay content of soil reflects organic carbon, CEC and nitrogen (Xue et al. 2013). Therefore, soils with high clay content had high microbial diversity.

Ribotypes like TRF 420 (Sphingomonas sp) and TRF51 (Bifidobacteria) were dominant in Bhopal and Noida. Whereas, the TRF66 (Streptococcus) and TRF70 (Acinetobacter) were dominant in Jabalpur. Actinomycetes and Acinetobacter are prevalent in low nutrient soils. Acinetobacter grows well under low nutrient situation and many species form intracellular inclusions of nutrients in the form of polyhydroxy-alkanoates (Abbott et al. 1974). PCA biplot of archaeal TRFs indicated that Bhopal and Jabalpur were closely placed. TRF93 and TRF468 were abundant in Bhopal and Jabalpur samples, while TRF 497, TRF 278 were dominant in the samples collected from Noida. Further studies are essential to explain the linkage between soil properties and archaeal diversity.

Brays curtis algorithm clustered the TRFs into different groups. The clustering depends on fluorescence intensity of the TRFs. If their fluorescence intensity of TRFs varies similarly they are clustered together. For example, TRF 66-TRF 70 and TRF 274-TRF 367 were closely placed. In case of archaea TRF 93, TRF 468, TRF 278, TRF 497 formed one cluster because these TRFs were most dominant. TRF 61, TRF 142, TRF 186, TRF 431 clustered together due to medium range of fluorescence intensity. TRF 57, TRF 82, TRF 164, TRF 218 formed another cluster due to low fluorescence intensity. This clustering strategies has been used to differentiate TRFs of methanotrophs in rice and forest soil (Mohanty et al. 2007). Similar approach has been used to cluster bacterial bph gene in Amazon dark soil to understand microbial diversity (de Lima Brossi et al. 2014). Archaea specific TRF 93, TRF 278, TRF468, TRF 497 were clustered together due to high abundance than other TRFs. Additive main effects and multiplicative interaction model (AMMI) inferred that TRFs were the significant factors than sampling sites. Similar results has been reported in a study determining the microbial diversity in soil during decomposition of Bt rice straw (Lu et al. 2010) and endophytes of potato (Pageni et al. 2013). Here, we show that the structure of bacterial and archaeal communities is not random at the spatial scale because the diversity and composition of bacterial and archaeal community in rhizosphere of J. curcas was largely similar. These results suggest that, to some degree, the large scale biogeographical patterns of rhizospheric microorganisms are fundamentally similar for same plant taxa.

To compare bacterial and archaeal diversity and community structure across soils, T-RFLP method was used. This method quantifies sequence variability in the 16S rRNA gene extracted from soil, producing a DNA fingerprint for each microbial community as unique ribotypes (restriction fragments). Although other approaches like sequence analysis of 16S rRNA clone libraries and pyrosequencing provides more detailed phylogenetic information, the T-RFLP method is better suited for analyzing a large number of samples (Burke et al. 2008). It is also commonly used for determining diversity and composition of highly complex microbial communities (Osborne 2014). Major limitation of the T-RFLP method is that it underestimates total bacterial diversity because the method resolves only a limited number of bands per gel (generally <100), and bacterial species can share restriction fragments (Dunbar et al. 2001). However, T-RFLP estimates of microbial community structure have been found to be generally robust and concur with alternative approaches such as 454 pyrosequencing in documenting microbial community differences (Pilloni et al. 2012).
