
Abstract

Temperate and dry deciduous forest covers major portion of terrestrial ecosystem in India. The two forest types with different dominant tree species differ in litter quality and root exudates, thereby exerting species-specific impact on soil properties and microbial activity. This study aims to examine the influence of forest type or dominant tree species on soil physico-chemical properties and its relationship with microbial characters in temperate and dry deciduous forest types. We assessed soil physico-chemical properties among five different sites located within the selected forest stand covered by different dominant species. The soil microbial biomass carbon (MBC), nitrogen (MBN) and phosphorous (MBP) were recorded high in oak soil, i.e., the MBC/TOC ratio was significantly higher in dry deciduous forest. Basal respiration was recorded highest at oak-mixed soil while qCO2 was comparatively high in oak soil. Temperate forest displayed the highest MBC/MBN ratio, while dry deciduous forest had the highest MBC/MBP ratio. Moreover, the MBN/TN ratio was found high in dry deciduous forest, whereas MBP/TP ratio was high in temperate forest. Additionally, the enzyme activities were significantly higher in an oak-mixed soil among all the sites. The results displayed that the soil microbial characters and soil physico-chemical uniqueness are interrelated, and were significantly influenced by specific forest type and climatic variables.



Introduction

Soil microorganisms are important components of terrestrial ecosystems because they play an important role in intrinsic phenomena like nutrient cycle and ecosystem functioning which directly involve in maintaining soil fertility and its structure. Soil microbial biomass formation is the living portion of soil organic matter, responsible for the decomposition and mineralization of the organic matter fraction that acts both as a sink and a source of nutrient which become available during the turnover of microbial biomass (Chen et al. 2005). Therefore, the information regarding the factors that control the soil microorganism and microbial biomass is fundamental to a sustainable environmental system. The accessibility and uptake of nutrients is directly proportional to the living component of the given soil niche. Thus, soil microbial processes strongly regulate the stability, fertility and functioning of ecosystems and used to assess the soil excellence among different vegetations (Fierer et al. 2003).

Due to various effects, the assessment of soil quality is relatively complicated. A specific combination of physico-chemical and biological factors is required for maintaining the soil strength. Understanding of these features supports in knowing the soil health. The major portion of terrestrial ecosystems is covered by forest land. Soil microbes regulate the decomposition rate, organic matter content of soil and the overall biogeochemical processes that govern the productivity of forest ecosystems (Six et al. 2004; Noguez et al. 2008) and in turn, the soil physico-chemical properties of the given forest type control the microbial biomass as well as their activity. Forest stands covered with different tree species; differ in litter quality and root exudates. This difference ultimately generates a divergence in soil properties and may influence the soil microbial community.

Natural forests that occur all over the world are formed through natural regeneration following stand-replacing disturbances by anthropogenic activities or by extreme natural events (Yang et al. 2010; Wang and Yang 2007). Approximately 30 % of total land area is covered by forest (boreal, temperate and tropical forest) (Holden and Treseder 2013). These forests are the source of global terrestrial carbon in which temperate forest ecosystem plays a major role in carbon sequestration from increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide, as it covers the major portion of terrestrial land (Myneni et al. 2001). It has been predicted that naturally regenerated forest stands are generally superior to plantations in nutrient cycling and soil quality (Burton et al. 2007), but some conflicting experimental results suggest that variations in soil microbial biomass probably depend on the specific forest ecosystems and climatic factors.

Various studies have been given to understand interrelationship between the tree species, soil microbial and physico-chemical properties of forest soil. Further, studies undertaken on varied forest soils confirm that various biotic and abiotic factors influence the microbial biomass, composition and activity (Landesman and Dighton 2011). Still, the information is limited as several factors control this interrelationship in the forest ecosystem. Consequently, the present study has been undertaken in different natural forest stands from dry deciduous and temperate region of North-India that contains a wide range of biodiversity. The main aim of the study is to hypothesize the impact of the specific forest type of biological properties that mainly include the difference in soil microbial biomass, respiration and soil enzymes activity, and interpret the correlation between soil biological and physico-chemical characteristics.


