
Abstract

Somatic cloning, also known as somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), is a promising technology which has been expected to rapidly extend the population of elaborately selected breeding boars with superior production performance. Chinese Guike No. 1 pig breed is a novel swine specialized strain incorporated with the pedigree background of Duroc and Chinese Luchuan pig breeds, thus inherits an excellent production performance. The present study was conducted to establish somatic cloning procedures of adult breeding boars from the Chinese Guike No. 1 specialized strain. Ear skin fibroblasts were first isolated from a three-year-old Chinese Guike No. 1 breeding boar, and following that, used as donor cell to produce nuclear transfer embryos. Such cloned embryos showed full in vitro development and with the blastocyst formation rate of 18.4 % (37/201, three independent replicates). Finally, after transferring of 1187 nuclear transfer derived embryos to four surrogate recipients, six live piglets with normal health and development were produced. The overall cloning efficiency was 0.5 % and the clonal provenance of such SCNT derived piglets was confirmed by DNA microsatellite analysis. All of the cloned piglets were clinically healthy and had a normal weight at 1 month of age. Collectively, the first successful cloning of an adult Chinese Guike No. 1 breeding boar may lay the foundation for future improving the pig production industry.



Introduction

Somatic cloning, also known as somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), is a promising technology which can be simply summarized as that transferring the nucleus of a somatic cell into an enucleated oocyte to reconstruct a new embryo, which can then be transplanted into a surrogate mother to generate an offspring (Wilmut et al. 2002; Gurdon and Wilmut 2011). In theory, using somatic cells from a live animal, SCNT technique can be used to produce a large number of offspring with exactly the same genetic makeup from the donor animal. Therefore, since the first batch of cloned pigs generated by SCNT in 2000 (Betthauser et al. 2000; Onishi et al. 2000; Polejaeva et al. 2000), such technique has been expected to rapidly extend the population of elaborately selected breeding boars with superior production performance (Vajta and Gjerris 2006; Vajta et al. 2007; Whyte and Prather 2011; Galli et al. 2012; Niemann and Lucas-Hahn 2012; Lee and Prather 2013; Liu et al. 2015).

Chinese Guike No. 1 pig breed is a novel swine specialized strain generated by crossbreeding of Duroc (male parent) with Chinese Luchuan pig breed (female parent). The later is a unique Chinese indigenous swine breed with numerous production advantages, such as higher resistance to disease, strong adaptive capacity to environmental change, as well as has a large litter size (Fang et al. 2004; Yang et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2014). Therefore, the Chinese Guike No. 1 pig breed which is incorporated with the pedigree background of Duroc and Luchuan pig breeds, resulting in an excellent production performance. In consideration of the traditional breeding process is prolonged and money-consuming, it’s expectable that somatic cloning could show its capabilities in improving the production and extension of adult Chinese Guike No. 1 breeding boars.

The present study was conducted to establish somatic cloning procedures of adult Chinese Guike No. 1 breeding boars for improving their application in pig production industry. We first isolated the ear skin fibroblasts from a three-year-old Chinese Guike No. 1 breeding boar. Cultured cells were then used as donor cells to produce cloned embryos. Such cloned embryos showed full in vitro development and with the blastocyst formation rate of 18.4 % (37/201, three independent replicates). After transferring a total of 1187 nuclear transfer derived embryos to four surrogate recipients, two of them became pregnant and gave birth to six live male offspring with normal health and development were produced. The overall cloning efficiency was 0.5 % and the clonal provenance of such piglets was confirmed by DNA microsatellite analysis.

In summary, in the present study, we successfully produced six healthy cloned piglets using the ear fibroblasts isolated from an adult Chinese Guike No. 1 breeding boar, laying the foundation for improving the application of such breeding boars with superior production performance in pig production industry.


