


Introduction

α-Galactosidase (α-d-galactoside galactohydrolase EC. 3.2.1.22) is an exoglycosidase which catalyses hydrolysis of terminal α-1,6-linked galactosyl residue from a wide range of substrates, including oligosaccharides of raffinose family sugars, such as stachyose, melibiose, verbascose and polysaccharides of galactomannans, locust bean, and guar gum (Anisha and Prema 2006, Talbot and Sygusch 1990).

α-Galactosidase has been reported to various biotechnological and clinical applications like processing of soymilk (Tzortzis et al. 2003), conversion of blood type (Goldstein et al. 1982), and in the treatment of Fabry’s disease (Fuller et al. 2004). Commercially, α-galactosidase is used in different industries like beet sugar industry for removing raffinose from molasses and sugar syrups (Sirisha et al. 2010). Similarly, it is reported to increase the nutritional quality of legumes by hydrolyzing galacto-oligosaccharides, galactomannans, which is also responsible for improved gelling in guar gum (Bulpin et al. 1990). Due to the presence of α-galactosides like raffinose and stachyose in soybeans, humans are incapable to digest soy-derived products (Silvestroni et al. 2002). The use of microbial α-galactosidase found to be a promising solution to degrade such non-digestible oligosaccharides in soy products, which opens an avenue for its use at industrial level (Cruz and Park 1982).

Over the period, fermentation techniques have achieved immense importance due to their economic, social, and environmental advantages. Solid-state (SSF) and submerged fermentations (SmF) are two types of fermentation techniques in which SSF has gained importance for the production of microbial enzymes, due to economical advantages, such as use of cheap and abundant agro-industrial waste as a substrate. It has special interest in the processes where the crude fermented product is used directly as the enzyme source (Pandey et al. 1999). Among various groups of microorganisms used in SSF, the filamentous fungi are the most exploited because of their ability to grow on solid substrates and production of wide range of extracellular enzymes (Archana and Satyanarayana 1997). SSF is superior to SmF due to various advantages like simple media composition (cost-effective constituents), aeration process, releases negligible quantity of effluent, thus reducing pollution concerns. In addition, they efficiently provide concentrated products.

Up till now, many researchers studied α-galactosidase from various perspectives using different microorganisms. A novel α-galactosidase was identified from the hyperthermophile archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus (Brouns et al. 2006). Cellular localization and purification were studied in variety of microorganisms, such as Saccharomyces carlbergensis (Lazo et al. 1977), Pichia gulliermandii (Church and Meyers 1980), Candida javanica (Cavazzoni et al. 1987), Aureobasidium pullulans (Saha and Bothast 1998), and Pseudomonas sp.(Hema and Helen 2012).

Response surface methodology (RSM) is responsible for increased product formation which is the need of hour. Response surface methodological optimization can overcome the problems associated with classical optimization. RSM is an assortment of statistical techniques for designing experiments, building models, evaluating the interactive effects of variables, and pointing the optimum conditions (Shivam et al. 2009). RSM is widely used in bioprocess technology for optimization of remarkable types of fermentation media (Desai 2008, Sunitha et al. 1999). Optimization of α-galactosidase using RSM has been previously reported from various microorganisms like a mutant strain Aspergillus foetidus (Liu C et al. 2007), Streptomyces griseoloalbus (Anisha et al. 2007) and Aspergillus niger MRSS 234 (Srinivas et al. 1994), Rhizopus oryzae Strain SUK (Gajdhane et al. 2016), etc.

But till date, not even a single report is present on statistical optimization and production of α-galactosidase from Fusarium monoliforme NCIM 1099. Therefore, the objectives of the present work are 1. to determine the potency of Fusarium monoliforme NCIM 1099 for the production of α-galactosidase, 2. development of an optimal medium composition for the production of α-galactosidase in SSF using response surface methodology, and 3. enzyme extraction, purification, and characterization of purified α-galactosidase.


