




Discussion

The predominant factor which limits the widespread utilization of oral stents for head and neck radiotherapy in the community setting is a lack of available dental or oral/maxillofacial professionals with knowledge and expertise in the creation of these devices. In this study, we have demonstrated the feasibility of utilizing 3D printing technology to create oral stents for use in patients undergoing head and neck radiotherapy using routine diagnostic CT imaging studies. Our technique is unique because it does not require the physical presence of the patient in order to fabricate the stent. Typically, oral stent fabrication requires at least 2 appointments with the patient to obtain dental impressions and assess the fit of the device. Our proposed method eliminates several of these steps and thus minimizes treatment delays.

There are several technical considerations associated with the design and fabrication of a 3D printed oral stent for use during head and neck radiotherapy treatment. Most importantly among these is the quality of the available diagnostic imaging which in turn directly affects the precision of the final oral stent product. We specifically selected a patient who had undergone diagnostic CT imaging with 1 mm slice thickness through the mandibular and maxillary dentition. While this procedure could be performed on imaging sets with greater slice thicknesses, the corresponding larger voxel size would limit the accuracy in defining the occlusal surfaces of the teeth. This in turn could produce a less robustly-fitting stent. Additionally, our selected patient had no significant imaging artifacts from the presence of dental hardware or amalgam. Similar to more sparely-sampled datasets described above, the presence of significant beam-hardening artifact on CT imaging may reduce the accuracy of the delineation of the mandibular and maxillary dentition. While it is not uncommon for many patients with head and neck cancer to have some degree of dental artifact, advances in software post-processing and use of dual-energy diagnostic CT imaging may help to reduce the impact of these artifacts on delineation and reconstruction of the relevant dental anatomy . For patients who remain unsuitable for stent creation from diagnostic imaging, we are currently exploring additional methods, including optical imaging techniques, to incorporate into our current workflow.

A second consideration is the minimization or prevention of propagated errors from the initial segmentation to modeling and printing of the final product. Currently, there is no single software platform which offers streamlined end-to-end capabilities for creation of an oral stent from diagnostic imaging data. We instead utilized a mixture of robust proprietary and open-source/free software to segment the dental anatomy, convert the resultant DICOM data to an STL format and design the stent. To prevent errors introduced in the delineation of the dental anatomy, all segmentation was performed and verified by an experienced radiation oncologist before conversion to an STL mesh. Design of the oral stent was performed using Autodesk Meshmixer which is a free albeit powerful 3D modeling and sculpting software that has been used to make high-fidelity patient-specific coronary vasculature and dental models . Printing of the final device was performed using the Form2 desktop SLA printer which is approved for dental applications with 3D printed objects demonstrating dimensional accuracy within 50–100 μm.

Another important technical consideration is the choice of materials used in the fabrication of the 3D printed oral stent. The selected materials and printing methods must produce a stent which is sufficiently rigid to resist deforming under physiologic loading. Such deformation in stent geometry would result in unstable day-to-day jaw positioning which in turn could potentially adversely affect the quality of the delivered radiation treatment. The stent must also be fabricated from a biologically inert, non-toxic material to minimize potential harm to the patient. Fortunately, there are several commercially-available materials specifically designed and approved for dental applications which satisfy the aforementioned criteria. Although we used a standard Formlabs clear resin in the fabrication of the stent described in this manuscript, we have recently begun printing oral stents with an approved dental resin for the Form2 platform using an identical workflow.

The last technical consideration is the time required for creation of the device. Treatment delays in the initiation of radiotherapy have been shown to adversely impact survival for patients with head and neck malignancies . It is therefore imperative that any innovative process be capable of fabrication of these devices in a timely manner. Using the technique discussed in this manuscript, we were able to produce the 3D printed stent depicted in Fig. 4, from the initial image segmentation to the completion of the post-processing steps, in less than eight hours. We anticipate that this required time will dramatically shrink with additional optimization and automation of our current workflow and allow these devices to be created in an on-demand fashion for expedited initiation of oncologic-directed therapies.
