
Abstract

Development of antibacterial and antibiofilm surfaces is in high demand. In this study, nanocomposite of Poly (ε-caprolactone)/Cloisite 30B was prepared by the solvent casting method. The membranes were characterised by SEM, AFM, and FTIR. Evaluation of water uptake, antimicrobial, antibiofilm, and microbial barrier properties demonstrated a significant antimicrobial and antibiofilm activity against MTCC strain of Staphylococcus haemolyticus and strong biofilm positive Staphylococcus epidermidis of clinical origin at low clay concentrations. These membranes acted as an excellent barrier to the penetration of microorganism. These nanocomposites can have promising applications in various fields including packaging.





Discussion

In this study, PCL/cloisite 30B composites were prepared and their properties were studied. From the SEM images, the surface of membranes can be observed to turn from smooth to rugged with increase in filler concentration. From the AFM images, nanoscale roughness of the membranes surfaces was measured as Ra and dense uniaxially oriented fibrils of PCL were observed in PCC0 as its characteristic feature (Cheng and Teoh 2004; Ng et al. 2000). The fibril formation has decreased in PCC5, which could indicate possible prevention of PCL nucleation by clay platelets. The Ra value was calculated from the roughness profile determined by AFM. The Ra of unmodified PCL film surface was 51.59 nm. After filler addition, the Ra increased to 69.54 nm for PCC5. The Rms values calculated from the AFM images were 67.56 nm and 96.58 nm for PCC0 and PCC5, respectively. There is a significant increase in Rms values after filler addition. The increased Ra and Rms values correspond to the morphological change observed in the SEM images (Diaconu et al. 2008). From the FTIR spectra, the incorporation of Cloisite 30B in the PCL matrix could be confirmed (Yahiaoui et al. 2015). From the results of water uptake studies, it can be observed that the membranes do not show any significant change upon increasing filler addition. Hence, this membrane can perform well in aqueous environment without any change in membrane integrity.

The contact angle measurements showed an increase in value as a function of filler loading. The hydrophobic filler which was added to the system might have increased the contact angle and thereby the hydrophobicity of the composite film. There was a tenfold increase in contact angle with the addition of 5% filler. From the mechanistic point of view, the hydrophobicity of the synthesised membrane could also aid in the antimicrobial activity by attracting the microbes to the surface of the composites. The previous studies have reported S. aureus to have hydrophobic characteristics (contact angle θ = 72 °C) due to the presence of highly negatively charged teichoic acid and lipoteichoic acid in its cell wall (Mitik-Dineva et al. 2009). Thermodynamically, hydrophobic cells would show preference for hydrophobic surfaces (Bos et al. 1999; Bruinsma et al. 2001). Hence, the bacteria might get attracted towards the hydrophobic membranes and subsequently get killed by the free surfactant present on the surface of the membrane. The surface energy of the composite film has been found to be decreasing with increase in clay concentration (Fig. 5f, Table 1); this indicates that the system developed the tendency to become less reactive with the surrounding when compared to the thin film without any filler. Upon lowering the free energy of the system, the polymer chains preferentially interact with the filler surface, and thereby decreasing the interaction with the surroundings. As with the contact angle, the surface energy also showed a tenfold increase in value of PCC5 (Abraham et al. 2012).

From the results of the study, the solvent cast membranes were found to exhibit filler concentration-dependent inhibition activity against S. haemolysis and S. epidermidis. As the antimicrobial activity is absent in PCC0, activity observed in PCC1, PCC3, and PCC5 can be confirmed to be due to the presence of cloisite 30B (Speranza et al. 2004). The antimicrobial activity of the PCL/clay composite has been linked to the migration of free ammonium surfactant from PCL composite film to the culture media, because intercalation of the PCL into the clay galleries could cause the release of the ammonium surfactant associated with the negatively charged part of the clay (Ferfera‐Harrar et al. 2014; Malachová et al. 2009). Hence, microbicidal activity of the composite can be considered to be related to the ammonium surfactants of the organoclay (Eudy 1981; Sauvet et al. 2000; Senuma et al. 1989) which can have activity against microorganisms due to their ability to interact with cell membrane (Yahiaoui et al. 2015). Under physiological conditions, bacterial cell wall has a negative charge due to the presence of functional groups, such as carboxylates, present in lipoproteins at the surface (Breen et al. 1995). The charge on clay minerals and the alkyl ammonium surfactant tends to attract the bacteria through electrostatic interactions. Hydrophobic interactions may also be involved between hydrophobic components of Cloisite 30B and the lipophilic components of bacterial cell walls, such as lipoproteins, liposaccharides, and phospholipids. Inactivation of bacteria may involve killing them or making them incapable of replicating (Herrera et al. 2000). It was suggested that both the charge and hydrophobic nature of the organoclay favour the association of bacteria to the surface of organoclay, where the surfactant performs its antimicrobial activity.

The biofilm detachment in the presence of composite films was carried out in vitro in 96-well plate. The significant reduction in the observed bacterial biomass can be an indication of ability of Cloisite 30B to kill the microbes and interfere with microbial replication. The results were quantified and no significant change in the biofilm formation was observed in PCC0 and PCC1. However, PCC3 and PCC5 showed a percent inhibition of biofilm formation to 16 and 22%, respectively. The decrease in cell attachment can be explained in terms of inability of microbial cells to replicate and due to cell death. (Herrera et al. 2000).

The composite membranes containing Cloisite 30B as filler proved to be very efficient barriers against microorganism when compared to uncovered media and PCC0 (Fig. 7). This property can be attributed to the fact that PCL/clay composites prevented the penetration of environmental microflora into the nutrient media. The filler in the composite, which has already been shown as a good antimicrobial candidate, could have asserted its antimicrobial property before the microbes could penetrate the membrane and grow in the contained medium. Thus, this membrane could be a very effective packaging material against microbial fouling of the packaged material, since even very low concentrations of the nanoclay prevented microbial penetration.
