
Abstract

In the present study, media composition for high production of pectinase by Enterobacter sp. PSTB-1 in submerged fermentation was optimized using response surface methodology (RSM). Mango fruit processing industrial waste (MIW) was used as substrate (carbon source) as it contains high amount of pectin. Enterobacter sp. PSTB-1 used in present study has given pectin clear zone (PCZ) of 34 mm is higher than other isolates. The experimental results made by statistical design for high pectinase production revealed that the suitable media components: NaNO3 2.0 g/l, KCl 0.50 g/l, KH2PO4 1.0 g/l, MgSO4·7H2O 0.50 g/l, Yeast extract 1.0 g/l, mango industrial waste powder 5.0 g/l. The actual pectinase activity was 75.23 % correlated with the predicted pectinase activity where the model (CCD) was significant. Response surface modelling applied effectively to optimize the production of pectinase in submerged fermentation to make the process low cost-effective by using powdered mango industrial waste as substrate.



Introduction

Mango is the most delicious fruit with its health benefits and commercially valuable seasonal fruit. So, there must be a need to process this fruit to make available its products in all seasons (Indian Horticulture Database 2011; Purnachandra Reddy and Saritha 2013). Many mango fruit processing industries were established throughout the world and were generating huge amounts of waste or residues while processing the mango fruits. It has been reported that 28 to 43 % of the total of mangoes remain as residues mainly constituted by peel and seeds are discarded during the process (Guzman et al. 2013). The mango industrial waste can be used in so many ways such as animal feed, fuel wood (dried seeds) and it can also be useful for vermicompost preparation and biogas production. Mango industrial waste is the best source for the production of industrially important pectinase, as it contains high amounts of pectin in ripened mango (Yashoda et al. 2005). Pectin is a jelly like matrix structural polysaccharide found in the primary cell wall and the middle lamella of fruits and vegetables (Namasivayam et al. 2011). Along with pectin other polysaccharides such as cellulose and xylan type polysaccharides strengthens the structure of cell-walls in the flesh of fruits (Beatriz and Fabrice 2012). Pectinase is mainly useful for increasing the filtration efficiency and clarification of fruit juices, most of these are microbial derived. Most of the Bacterial isolates such as Bacillus sp and Pseudomonas.sp., Bacillus sp. MFW7, Bacillus cereus, Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus cereus, and Staphylococcus aureus were reported as good pectinase producers (Geetha et al. 2012; Mukesh kumar et al. 2012; Venkata Naga Raju et al. 2013). In the present study dried mango fruit processing industrial waste (MIW powder; one of the polluting solid wastes) has been utilized for the production of pectinase through submerged fermentation by using pectinolytic Enterobacter sp. PSTB-1 under RSM conditions.


