
Abstract

Drought stress due to water deficit is a major problem of rice cultivation as a most drought-sensitive crop plant. A rice mutant line (MT58) was developed after mutagenesis of cv. Neda by ethyl methane sulfonate (EMS) and selected for dwarfism (18 cm shorter than Neda). The extent of its molecular changes relative to parental cultivar was assessed by SSR and ISSR markers, and the response of the line along with parental cultivar and another mutant line (MTA) to mild and severe water deficit, was evaluated in a field experiment. A molecular assessment using 41 SSR markers showed that dwarf line MT58 had significant molecular difference with two other lines. ISSR assay also proved the considerable mutational effect of EMS on two mutant lines compared with the original wild line. Field experiments revealed that limited irrigation caused mild-to-severe decrease in all the studied traits, including chlorophyll contents. In mild water-stress mutant line, MT58 showed a low (3 %) yield loss as compared with cultivar Neda with a high (14 %) yield loss. Interestingly, in severe water-stress mutant line, MT58 showed a low (19 %) yield loss as compared with mutant line MTA and cv. Neda with high (33 and 31 %, respectively) yield loss. In severe stress, mutant MT58 had the highest values of panicle length, total kernels per panicle, fertile kernels, and chlorophyll contents, while cv. Neda had the highest values of plant height, tiller number, and plant yield, and reduction in chlorophyll content at drought stress condition was correlated with yield loss (0.64 and 0.697 for chl.a and chl.b, respectively). The results of this research obviously confirm that mutant line MT58 despite of its stunt figure shows a low yield loss due to drought stress and hence is a promising line for cultivation under drought condition.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0542-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Abiotic stresses especially drought can affect the physiological status of an organism and have adverse effects on growth, development, and metabolism (Chutia and Borah 2012). Drought is an abiotic stress which affects plants at various levels and stages of their life period. This abiotic stress not only affects plant–water relations through the reduction of water content, turgor, and total water, but it also affects stomatal closure, limits gas exchange, reduces transpiration, and disturbs photosynthesis (Razak et al. 2013). Negative effects of water deficit on mineral nutrition and metabolism decrease the leaf area and alter assimilate partitioning among the plant organs (Zain et al. 2014).

Drought stress is of high importance, particularly for drought-sensitive plants, such as rice. Rice varieties have differential responses to abiotic stresses because of the complexity of interactions between stress factors and various molecular, biochemical, and physiological processes that affect plant growth and development (Zhu 2002; Wadhwa et al. 2010). Drought stress due to water deficit is a common constraint in upland cultivation systems of plants (Zain et al. 2014). More than the 20 million hectares of rain-fed lowland rice worldwide suffer water deficit at different growth stages (Cabangon et al. 2002; Quampah et al. 2011; Zain et al. 2014). Drought stress reduces the rice growth and severely affects different traits, such as seedling biomass, stomatal conductance, photosynthesis, starch metabolism, and plant–water relations (Sarkarung et al. 1997; Jaleel et al. 2009; Farooq et al. 2009; Quampah et al. 2011). Pantuwan et al. reported that grain yield of some rice varieties was reduced by up to 81 % under drought condition and this reduction depended on timing, duration, and severity of the plant water stress. Cha-um et al. reported differential responses of rice genotypes to water deficit. They observed when rice genotyped exposed to water deficit, panicle length and fertile grains in two tolerant varieties were not significantly decreased, leading to greater productivity than in two sensitive cultivars (Cha-um et al. 2010).

Influence of the environmental stresses on growth and yield can be estimated by measurement of photosynthetic traits, such as chlorophyll content and chlorophyll fluorescence parameters, since these traits have a close correlation with carbon exchange rate (Guo and Li 2000). Energetic status of the chloroplast increases as a consequence of the water stress which has a direct relationship to that of increased amount of total chlorophyll and Chla and Chlb among the stressed induced verities (Ranjbarfordoei et al. 2000). Rice is one of the most drought-susceptible crops, especially at the reproductive stage (Agarwal et al. 2016). It was reported that at rain-fed conditions, water deficit has a serious effect, especially at the booting stage, during which plants are particularly drought-susceptible, leading to low-crop productivity (Pantuwan et al. 2002).

Since water availability will be a major constraint for paddy rice productivity in the near future, we studied the response of a dwarf mutant line of rice (recently developed in our research group using mutagenesis by ethyl methane sulfonate, EMS) along with its parental cultivar to water deficit aiming to evaluate effect of dwarfism on morpho-physiological traits, particularly plant yield in a field experiment.


