
Abstract

The rapid detection of pathogens in food is becoming increasingly critical for ensuring the safety of consumers, since the majority of food-borne illnesses and deaths are caused by pathogenic bacteria. Hence, rapid, sensitive, inexpensive and convenient approaches to detect food-borne pathogenic bacteria is essential in controlling food safety. In this study, a multiplex PCR assay for the rapid and simultaneous detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes was established. The invA, stx and hlyA genes specifically amplified DNA fragments of 284, 404 and 510 bp from Salmonella spp., L. monocytogenes and E. coli O157:H7, respectively. The 16S rRNA gene was targeted as an internal control gene in the presence of bacterial DNA. The specificity and sensitivity of the multiplex PCR were performed by testing different strains. The multiplex PCR assay was able to specifically simultaneously detect ten colony-forming unit/mL of each pathogen in artificially inoculated samples after enrichment for 12 h. The whole process took less than 24 h to complete, indicating that the assay is suitable for reliable and rapid identification of these three food-borne pathogens, which could be suitable in microbial epidemiology investigation.



Introduction

Food-borne diseases, which are mainly caused by food-borne pathogens, are a serious health hazard in both developing and developed countries. Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes are commonly considered as food-borne pathogens in many countries (Cetinkaya et al. 2014; Modzelewska-Kapituła et al. 2014; Nowak et al. 2007; Wang et al. 2007; Zhou et al. 2014). Salmonella illnesses are commonly associated with poultry and eggs, along with meat, unpasteurized milk or juice, cheese, contaminated raw fruits and vegetables, spices and nuts, through consumption of contaminated salmonellosis (Modzelewska-Kapituła et al. 2014; Nowak et al. 2007; Zhou et al. 2014). The invA, a gene of Salmonella, contains those sequences that are unique to this genus and has been proved as a suitable PCR target with potential diagnostic applications (Jamshidi et al. 2009). In addition, approximately 634 people were infected by Salmonella heidelberg from the farms chicken, according to the recent reports by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention in 2013 and 2014. Listeriosis, a serious infection usually caused by eating food contaminated with the bacterium L. monocytogenes (Ahmed et al. 2015), has a high case fatality rate (20–30 %) in immunocompromised populations (Chen and Knabel 2007). It is considered a hazardous agent in the food industry, and L. monocytogenes can be detected in a large variety of vegetable food products as well as animal products (Mead et al. 1999). L. monocytogenes is found in a variety of foods such as milk, milk products, eggs, poultry and meat (Amagliani et al. 2004). L. monocytogenes became a frequent pathogen involved more frequently in sporadic severe illnesses and outbreaks of food-borne infections. hlyA is the gene that codes for the listeriolysin O toxin which is present in the genome of pathogenic L. monocytogenes. Since this gene codes for the toxin of the pathogen, it is necessary for virulence and is used for identifying L. monocytogenes in the presence of other Listeria strains (Churchill et al. 2006). According to recent reports by the CDC, there were 11 multistate outbreaks of Shiga toxin-producing E. coli in the USA from 2011 to 2014 with six of them attributed to E. coli O157:H7. The transmission of E. coli O157:H7 remains a major public health concern worldwide due to its low infectious dose. It is highly virulent; an inoculation of less than 10–100 CFU of E. coli O157:H7 is sufficient to cause infection (Coffey et al. 2011). E. coli O157:H7 may cause sporadic or epidemic cases of diarrhea, often with bloody stools, due mainly to the ingestion of contaminated food products (Chase-Topping et al. 2007). Shiga toxin (Stx) is one of the major virulence factors causing hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic uremic syndrome involved in E. coli O157:H7 pathogenesis (Melton-Celsa et al. 2012) and are identified as stx1, stx1c, stxfc, stx2, stx2e, stx2d and stx2g (Gobius et al. 2003). These genes code for the toxin of the pathogen; it is necessary for virulence and useful for identifying E. coli O157:H7 in the presence of other strains. Some studies have employed one primer which could detect both the Stx1 and Stx2 genes (Aranda et al. 2007; Toma et al. 2003). Hence, the presence of bacterial pathogens in food poses a potential risk of infection in human health. Thus, the development of a rapid, cheap and sensitive method for the detection of these pathogens in food is required not only for improving food safety, but also for protecting human health.

Currently, the proposed approaches for the detection of food-borne pathogens is mainly the culture-based bacterial isolation and identification, but this is probably tedious and time-consuming (2–3 days) (Zhao et al. 2014). The application of genetic-based techniques is able to detect the pathogenic bacteria with greater sensitivity and reliability than conventional culture methods. PCR is more than a promising method; it has been applied with success in various protocols used for pathogen detection (Giau et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2014; Rahn et al. 1992; Zhang et al. 2009), particularly multiplex PCR assay (Xu et al. 2012). Interestingly, multiplex PCR (mPCR) allows multiple gene analysis of bacteria at the same time in a single reaction tube simultaneously, saving time and reagents. A rapid, sensitive and specific method that would allow detection of multiple pathogens simultaneously from different types of foods would be very valuable for the food industry and regulatory agencies. Thus, keeping the above in view, we developed a multiplex PCR for the rapid and simultaneous detection of three epidemic food-borne pathogens: E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella spp., and L. monocytogenes. The performance of the multiplex assay, including its sensitivity, specificity and precision in qualitative analyses, was comprehensively evaluated in comparison with single target assays. The capacity of the proposed assay to detect multiple target pathogens simultaneously was also performed, and the effect of non-target interference on the assay performance was evaluated. The results obtained with artificially contaminated food samples show that the multiplex assay can simultaneously detect these three target food-borne pathogens in foods with high sensitivity and reliability.


