
Abstract

The effect of ultrafiltered xylanase–pectinase concoction produced simultaneously by a bacterial isolate using agro-waste-based media was assessed in prebleaching of plywood waste pulp. Ultrafiltered enzymes caused 12.5% reduction in kappa number at reduced enzyme dose of xylanase–pectinase (4.0–0.8 IU) per gram of pulp under optimized conditions at pH 8.5, temperature 55 °C, and treatment period of 2 h. Using this methodology, amount of Cl2–ClO2 consumption can be reduced up to 30 and 28.86%. Significant improvement in physical and optical properties of pulp was obtained along with an additional reduction in BOD and COD values up to 18.13 and 21.66% using this novel biodelignification approach. This is the first report showing the advantages of using ultrafiltered xylanase–pectinase over crude enzymes in enhancing the bleaching capacity of pulp. This study focussing on the development of good quality paper with less pollution generating strategy will definitely prove a boon for industries.



Introduction

The evolution of unconventional biotechnological techniques in various processing industries plays a huge role in solving the vital problems of pollution created by the industries. As far as the environment is concerned, paper manufacturing industries are observed to be the worst offenders. Several toxic organo-chlorine compounds are formed during bleaching by the conventional chemical methods, which are found to be bioaccumulating and harmful for the biological systems (Fiedler et al. 1990; Bajpai et al. 2006). These chlorinated organic by-products include mainly dioxins, which cause severe environmental damage, high COD values of water, and ultimately responsible for expensive waste water treatment (Zhang et al. 2008). Although the economic value of a nation is improved by industrialization, the effluents produced by some industries also cause a significant harm to the environment (Hossain and Rao 2014; Raj et al. 2014; Hossain and Ismail 2015). There is massive challenge for pulp and paper mills in handling dangerous pollutants, looking at the environmental load and legal necessities (Kamali and Khodaparsat 2015). To reduce the pollution created by these industries as well as to enhance the quality of paper, microbial enzymes have gained a unique place due to their potential application in paper and pulp industries in an ecofriendly manner.

Lignin, a complex polyphenolic structure, is covalently linked to cell wall polysaccharides as lignin-carbohydrate complexes. Xylanase helps in bleaching by hydrolyzing the xylan from lignin–xylan complex (Yin et al. 2011), thereby decreases the consumption of chlorine and consequently lowers the release of hazardous chemicals in the effluent, hence creating an ecofriendly technology (Beg et al. 2001). Apart from xylanase, pectinase has also been used in pulp and paper industries. During alkaline conditions of pulping, the release of pectin from fiber structure creates pool of anionic trash in the aqueous phase, which is responsible for the high consumption of cationic additives, and ultimately, these anionic-cationic complexes cause blockage of the drainage system. Pectinase helps to degrade the pectin released into the aqueous phase of pulp (Lund et al. 2004). Crude xylanase–pectinase enzymes have been successfully used in biobleaching of plywood industrial waste soda anthraquinone pulp (Agrawal et al. 2016) and in biobleaching of mixed hardwood kraft pulp (Kaur et al. 2010).

In this report, ultrafiltered (UF) enzymes have been applied in biobleaching of soda anthraquinone (SAQ) pulp. The aim of this work is to compare and evaluate the bleaching potential of ultrafiltered xylano-pectinolytic enzymes with crude xylanase–pectinase concoction, on plywood veneer SAQ pulp. No such type of work using ultrafiltered xylanase–pectinase mixture has been reported in the literature until now. This is the first report showing the role of UF xylanase–pectinase synergism in reducing toxic bleaching chemicals consumption and ultimately the cost of waste water treatment, along with the production of superior quality paper with significant improvement in various physical and optical properties of plywood pulp.


