
Abstract

The present work evaluates the microbiological quality of raw salad vegetables (RSV) consumed in Dhanbad city, India. A total of 480 samples of 8 different raw salad vegetables from local market were examined for overall microbial quality in terms of aerobic mesophilic, psychrotrophic counts, yeast, mould and total coliform levels. E. coli O157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella sp. were detected by real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) subsequent to isolation. Results showed that all the samples were found positive for total coliform; however, E. coli was detected in 16.7% of the total samples. Pathogenic microorganisms such as E. coli O157:H7, L. monocytogenes and Salmonella spp. were detected in 1.3, 3.5 and 4.0%, respectively, of the total samples. However, pathogens were not detected in any of the cabbage samples. The Exiguobacterium sp. (Strain ISM SP 2014) was detected in the spinach sample while studying the bacterial contamination, reported for the first time on the surface of RSV. The 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed less than 92% similarity with sequences available in the public domain.



Introduction

Raw salad vegetables (RSV) are an essential ingredient of a healthy diet, and the demand for salad vegetables has increased in recent years. Nutritionists emphasize the importance of raw vegetables in healthy diets, and researchers and governmental publicity campaigns around the world tend to recommend consumption of at least five servings of fruits and vegetables per day. In contrast to their health benefits, the consumption of fresh vegetables has also been associated with risk for consumers (Weldezgina and Muleta 2016). Vegetables are rich in carbohydrates, anti-oxidants, minerals, vitamins and fibres (Said 2012) and often consumed uncooked. The phytonutrients can act as effective media for the transmission of pathogens (Khan et al. 1992; Abougrain et al. 2010). RSV can become contaminated with pathogenic micro-organisms whilst growing in fields, or during harvesting, post-harvest handling, processing and distribution. Different agronomic practices can contaminate vegetables in various stages. Contamination occurs mostly before harvesting, either by contaminated manure, sewage, irrigation water, and wastewater from livestock operations or directly from wild and domestic animals or during harvesting, transport, processing, distribution, and marketing or even at home (Eraky et al. 2014; Rahman et al. 2014; Pagadala et al. 2015; Maffei et al. 2016). The use of wastewater for irrigation affects the quality of RSV and human health. It could be the possible source of pathogenic microorganisms on vegetables. Pathogens like Salmonella sp., Shigella sp., Campylobacter sp., L. monocytogenes and E. coli O157:H7 can contaminate RSV through contact with sewage and manure. Contaminations may also occur after harvest through dirty wash water, by cross-contamination from an infected food-handler (Sivapalasingam et al. 2004), and their consumption either raw or uncooked can be the important risk factor for the transmission of pathogens (Said 2012). Microorganisms that adhere to the surface of the vegetables are mainly Gram-negative saprophytes that may survive even after washing and sanitizing steps due to the formation of biofilms on the surface of the vegetable or from protection by the cuticle of the vegetable (Seo et al. 2010).

The human infections associated with consumption of raw fruits and vegetables have increasedduring the past decade (Eraky et al. 2014) and have been recognized as a means of transmission of foodborne pathogens (Pagadala et al. 2015). The factors contributing to this increase may include changes in agronomic practices and an increase in the number of immune-compromised consumers (Eraky et al. 2014). Many reports specified that pathogenic bacteria may adhere to the surface of raw vegetables and cause foodborne outbreaks or chronic infections (Oliveira et al. 2011). Foodborne illnesses caused by E. coli are one of the most important gastrointestinal diseases and represent a public health risk. Its presence on the surface of RSV indicates the contamination of foecal origin. Therefore, the presence of E. coli can be used to evaluate the microbiological quality of raw vegetables.

A number of national microbiological guidelines have been published in many countries such as the UK, France, Japan, Korea (Seo et al. 2010) and Singapore (AVA 2005). In India, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI 2006) have published a regulation which covers food safety in the country.

There has been an increasing number of fresh produce-associated foodborne illnesses identified internationally and efforts are being made to resolve these food safety problems (Denis et al. 2016). However, information on the microbiological quality of RSV, especially with respect to incidence of bacterial pathogens, are not well documented in the city of Dhanbad, India. This study aimed to evaluate the microbial contamination on the surface of unwashed RSV consumed in Dhanbad city of India.


