
Abstract

Thirty isolates of fluorescent pseudomonads were obtained from rhizosphere of different crops in Raichur, India. The fluorescent pseudomonad strains were characterized in vitro for biochemical traits, antimicrobial traits, and pyoluteorin antibiotic production. All the isolates that showed fluorescent pigment production under UV light were rod shaped, Gram negative, positive for oxidase, catalase and citrate utilization tests, and negative for indole test. Out of 30 isolates, 07 isolates were positive for HCN production, 15 isolates were positive for H2S production, and all the isolates were positive for siderophore production. Among all the isolates, RFP-22 showed the maximum percent inhibition of mycelium (46.66 %) of Rhizoctonia solani, the pathogen, and the remaining isolates showed the moderate to least inhibition of mycelium growth of R. solani. The 16S rRNA analysis confirmed that the antibiotic positive isolates belonged to genus Pseudomonas. The amplification of 779 bp region in isolates RFP- 4 and RFP-19 corresponded to pyoluteorin antibiotic-coding pltB gene. Further characterization of pyoluteorin antibiotic through TLC and TOF–MS analysis confirmed the presence of pyoluteorin at 274.26 (g/mol) peak and 2.10 min retention time. Biochemical and molecular analyses confirmed the antagonism of Pseudomonas and isolate through pyoluteorin production.



Introduction

Some of the rhizobacteria positively influence on plant growth and health which were referred as Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR). These rhizobacteria are abundant in rhizosheric soil of several crops, and these maintained the ecological balance in niche needed for their survival. These PGPR played a pivotal role in both growth promotion and plant disease control. The mechanisms of growth promotion by these PGPRs are complex and appear to comprise both changes in the microbial balance in the rhizosphere and alterations in host plant physiology (Bashan and Bashan 2005). Biological control of diseases by plant growth promoting rhizobacteria was well-established phenomenon (Shaikh and Sayyed 2015; Shaikh et al. 2016). The antibiotics, HCN, H2S, and siderophore have been shown to play a major role in the suppression of several plant pathogens (Handelsman and Stabb 1996; Shaikh et al. 2014).

Among rhizobacteria, Pseudomonas sp. are often used as model root-colonizing bacteria (Lugtenberg et al. 2001). The plant growth promoting strain fluorescent Pseudomonas are known to produce an array of antibiotics, such as 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (2,4-DAPG), pyoluteorin (PLT), pyrrolnitrin (PRN), phenazine-1-carboxyclic acid (PCA), 2-hydroxyphenazines, phenazine-1-carboxamide (PCN), rhamnolipids, oomycin A, cepaciamide A, ecomycins, viscosinamide, and karalicin which are capable of suppressing a broad spectrum of plant pathogens. Among them pyoluteorin, 2,4-DAPG and phenazine are major determinants in biocontrol activity (Borauh and Kumar 2002).

Pyoluteorin was aromatic phenolic polyketide antibiotic that was first isolated from P. aeruginosa (Takeda 1958) and later from P. fluorescens strains Pf-5 and CHA0 (Bencini et al. 1983). PLT has bactericidal, herbicidal, and fungicidal activities, in particular against Pythium spp. (Takeda 1958). Howell and Stipanovic first established the importance of pyoluteorin antibiotic production in suppression of seedling pathogens, such as Pythium ultimum, causing damping off in cotton using P. fluorescens pf-5. Similarly, the efficacy of P. fluorescens (Pf-5) could be improved by altering the expression of the pyoluteorin producing genes in such a way that effective concentrations of the antibiotic are reached in the seed spermosphere more quickly after a seed was planted (Kraus and Loper 1995). Genetic analysis of several Pseudomonas strains has also established a positive correlation between antibiotic production and disease suppression (Homma and Suzui 1989).

The present investigation is aimed at screening of pyoluteorin gene and antimicrobial traits in several fluorescent pseudomonad strains of different crop rhizospheres through PCR and to characterize pyoluteorin antibiotic through thin-layer chromatography and Time-of-Flight–Mass spectroscopy (TOF–MS).


