




Discussion

Based on the proposed approach and subsequent verifications preformed in this study, a detailed description of the performance has been provided as well as related limitations have been discussed and addressed.

Scan-flaw rectification

With currently available scanning technologies and limited compliance of the patient in terms of maintaining the required posture during scanning, presence of holes and deformations within the limb model is a major problem. The proposed system has the potential to remedy these flaws through use of a simple programmable modeling technique sans use of high-accuracy scanners and complex post-production procedures. The clinician can, therefore, ignore the presence of small holes that occur during the scanning process, thereby finishing the task much faster. With shorter scanning durations, patient trembling can be avoided. The proposed digital design technique simplifies the scanning process for clinicians and eliminates the need for them to learn additional post-production tools. However, the effect of the hole-filling function depends on the scale of gaps formed on unclosed cross-sections. If the gaps are large or if certain detailed features are located at these gaps, the command to fix concerned cross-sections via interpolation cannot be used, and the original shape cannot be accurately recreated. Indeed, clinicians must be aware of such a possibility.

In addition, computed tomography (CT), which captures medical images in the digital imaging and communication (DICOM) format has, at times, been utilized in fracture treatments—to facilitate further investigations in cases concerning hard-tissue traumas—and can serve as an alternate source for obtaining accurate external 3D surfaces of injured limbs sans the defects involved in the original 3D-scanning process. Through use of medical-image-viewer software, DICOM files could be transformed into STL models and provided as input to the proposed system for splint design, with the limb model appearing as a single object in the STL file to satisfy input requirements. However, CT imaging involves higher costs compared to 3D optical scanning and prescription necessities depend on the clinician’s diagnosis.

Rapid design and training

Most CAD software are designed for creation of endless geometric diversities; however, splint design is a regular task involving generation of a model that exhibits specific features. Based on extant studies , massive manual-modeling steps involved in the splint design and initial scanning tasks generally require up to 20 min to 3 h of completion time, which through use of the proposed technique, can be reduced to approximately 2–3 min.

The proposed programmable modeling tool is a key factor enabling the system designer to reduce the aforementioned manual operations in CAD to a few steps. The said tool also automatically performs required computations, thereby directly providing parameters of interest to the clinician, so that the splint design process could be completed within few minutes without the need for complex operations and/or training. The division-control method enables the system to effectively perform computations and allows clinicians to monitor splint generation at each stage. Basic viewport navigation, curve drawing, and parameter modification are the only skills required on part of the clinician, and these can be taught and/or memorized within 20 min. However, if the scanned model itself is of a poor quality, the clinician is more likely to obtain invalid results. This, in turn, would require more time to test different parameters and input curves. Nevertheless, if the solution fails, the 3D-scanning process can be repeated.

Fabrication-time reduction

Presently, the printing process occupies the most time involved in the overall design and production of 3D-printed splints—approxiamtely10 h, in general. The proposed study, demonstrates the possibility of reducing the printing time to a few hours through use of the modeling technique, wherein the system divides the splint into two or three compassable pieces and simultaneously generates all parts using multiple 3D printers. The volume of support material utilized during printing can be economized via optimum model placement on the printing bed. Additionally, the structural thickness can be adjusted in accordance with the splint, area and corresponding computation can be embedded within the system. Surface areas of the 10 splints listed in Table 1 were automatically generated by the system after due calculation of their thicknesses and lattice-structure densities. However, attainment of the required splint strength requires further mechanical validation for revising parametric calculations concerning the thickness and lattice pattern.

Swelling acclimation and comfort

Overcoming inflammations and swellings that occur over the course of fracture treatments is a common issue that must be accounted for during splint design, as prescribed by Fitch . Splints designed using the proposed system are rigid and fastened by screws; hence, by removing a set of screws along one of the gaps, the splint can be rendered flexible to accommodate limb swelling, as depicted in Fig. 20(a and b). Two Velcro straps were employed for fastening the splint and adjusting its fit (Fig. 20 (c)) ; strap rings could be generated by the system—in a manner similar to placement-screw seats placed along gaps—for fixing Velcro straps (Fig. 20 (d)). However, long-term usage and limb swelling may cause tissue herniation into the lattice structure. To preventing such occurrences, holes within the lattice structure must be shrunk by adjusting relevant parameters or hole distribution in the concerned area must be altered. Besides, use of a flexible gauze to encapsulate the affected limb, prior to wearing the splint, must be considered as part of the immobilization treatment. Through use of the above methods, user comfort can be ensured during fitting and rounded splint edges can be created to effectively buffer the friction between the splint and limb skin; nonetheless, medical-grade filaments that satisfy ISO-10993-10 standards (tests for irritation and skin sensitization), such as the Fabrial-R (JSR) material, must be employed in future splint fabrication to ensure biocapability.Fig. 20Solution to swelling accommodation—(a) Screw remove from gap; (b) Gap opening; (c) Velcro straps; and (d) Strap rings

Fig. 20

Solution to swelling accommodation—(a) Screw remove from gap; (b) Gap opening; (c) Velcro straps; and (d) Strap rings

Although FEA simulations confirm attainment of the minimum strength required during splint modeling, and no critical discomfort was detected during fit tests, fracture recovery usually takes several weeks to months. A long-term splint-wearing experiment must, therefore, be performed to accurately assess material stability and changes of patient comfort. Such experiments are intended to be performed as part of further research. Patient skin perspiration, limb compression, and occurrence of minor accidents during treatment may cause the splint material to age or wear and even partially break. In view of these, regular follow-up and replacement of splint parts on a monthly or biweekly is highly recommended.

Design openness and extended applications

The customization system employed in this study is not based on a secure software, but rather on an approximately 200-kb binary Grasshopper file that is workable in the suggested software. The system, therefore, is vulnerable and easy to disseminate and/or modify. Besides the upper limb, the proposed program is equally applicable to anatomic models of other body parts, such as the trunk and lower limb, to generate wearable devices, as depicted Fig. 21. However, the screw-system standard and calculations concerning the thickness and lattice structure need to be reinforced and tested carefully to ensure the necessary strength and safety. Any CAD designer or engineer familiar with programming tools can maintain the system with a Creative Commons Attribution license and develop extended versions based on the Grasshopper file to assist other treatment purposes. However, Rhinoceros 3D is not open source, and its commercial, educational, or trial license is required for exporting STL files of splint models. The study identifies a new collaborative relationship between the system designer and clinician to mold their own splint customization processes by exchanging their knowledge in medicine, design engineering, and 3D printing. The concept of the customization system as an open source can assist in the distribution of splint-parameter big data based on accumulated individual practical experiences.Fig. 21Wearable devices generated based on anatomic models of feet

Fig. 21

Wearable devices generated based on anatomic models of feet
