
Abstract

Grape marc seeds contain large amounts of different polyphenolic compounds so they can be used for the recovery of these classes of compounds. A new green extraction method for the recovery of phenols from the grape seeds was developed. To provide a high quality extract sourced from natural product by using enzymes as alternative solvents and spending less energy, it is impeccable to call this method “green”. Furthermore, this method was optimized by finding out which conditions provide the best possible results and achieving the maximum recovery of polyphenols from grape seeds. The optimization of the enzyme-assisted extraction of phenols was conducted using the commercially available oenological enzyme preparations with respect to the enzyme dosage, temperature, extraction time, pH value and enzyme preparation by applying the response surface methodology. Optimal conditions were determined using the enzyme preparation Lallzyme EX-V, at the extraction temperature of 48 °C, extraction time of 2 h and 43 min, pH 3.5 and enzyme dosage of 20.00 mg g−1. The new optimized extraction method is less expensive, simple, fast, precise and selective for the recovery of simple phenols (monomeric and dimeric form) and since it is based on the environmentally friendly extraction solvent it may provide a valuable alternative to the conventional extraction methods. The obtained extracts can be used for the application in pharmaceutical, food and cosmetic industry.



Introduction

Grape is one of the most important horticultural crops in the world with an annual production greater than 77 million tons in year 2013, whereof the European countries contribute about 38 %. After vinification, there remains over 3 million tons of grape marc, which is sometimes used as material for obtaining certain biocomponents (FAOSTAT 2013). Grape marc is mainly composed of grape skins (78 %) and grape seeds (16 %) (Dwyer et al. 2014) and contains numerous high-value compounds such as organic acids (tartaric, malic and citric acids), polyphenolic compounds (anthocyanins, flavan-3-ols, and flavonols), aroma compounds, grape seed oil and dietary fibers (Yu and Ahmedna 2013). Among the polyphenolic compounds, grape seeds contain a high amount of monomeric, oligomeric and polymeric forms of flavan-3-ols and hydroxybenzoic acids. Most abundant monomeric flavan-3-ols are epigallocatechin, gallocatechin, catechin, epicatechin and epicatechin-gallate. Polymeric forms or condense tannins are polymers formed by the condensation of monomeric flavan-3-ols. Their properties are defined by the nature of interflavan bonds and monomeric units. In comparison to monomeric and dimeric forms, these compounds do not dissolve in aqueous phases.

The literature showed that, in vitro and/or in vivo, phenols are able to: reduce inflammation, stop the development of tumors, present proapoptotic and anti-angiogenic actions. These compounds can modulate the immune system and prevent osseous disturbance, as well. There is evidence that phenols are able to aid incriminated in osteoporosis, increase the capillary resistance by acting on the constituents of blood vessels, protect the cardiovascular system as well as protect the retina. These compounds are used in numerous sectors of the food industry as natural additives as well as in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industry (Zillich et al. 2015).

In the production of the food and pharmaceutical products, raw organically obtained materials with a very low content of agrochemical residues are preferred. This is especially highlighted in the viticulture. Due to the high sensitivity of grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) to fungal diseases, this branch of agriculture applies a very high amount of fungicides (EU 2003). To reduce the fungicide application, the trend today is to allow the cultivation of disease resistant grape cultivars obtained by crossing the American species with V. Vinifera ones (Reisch et al. 2012). The cultivar ‘Regent’ is one of the newly successful breeds, characterized by a high content of individual polyphenols and especially anthocyanins, flavonols and flavan-3-ols (Karoglan Kontić et al. 2016).

Sample preparation is the crucial process for the polyphenol analysis of grapes. Different conventional solvent extraction techniques have been applied in polyphenol analysis. These techniques are generally based on the use of different toxic and environmentally harmful organic solvents. The extraction methods based on the extraction solvents harmful to human health are scare which restricts the application of the grape seed extracts in pharmaceutical, food and cosmetic industry. Enzyme-assisted extraction (EAE) is a green extraction technique. Compared to the conventional solvent extractions, EAE does not use toxic organic solvents. During the extraction of the grape berry seeds, a degradation of cell walls is mandatory. This process enables the release of cell components to the extraction solvent. The cell wall could be disrupted by the action of different enzymes such as pectinases [pectin methylesterase (PME), pectin lyase (PL) and polygalacturonase (PG)], tannases, cellulases and hemicellulases (Puri et al. 2012). This process is based on the development of EAE methods. Nowadays, there are numerous enzyme preparations for different purposes available in the market, which contain various amount of PME, PL, PG, cellulase, and hemicellulase. A successful application of EAE for the extraction of polyphenols from different plant matrices, such as black current juice press residue (Landbo and Meyer 2001), apple skins (Pinelo et al. 2008) and grape skins (Tomaz et al. 2016) is well documented in literature, but there are only a few studies concerning the effect of enzyme addition on the extractability of polyphenols from grape seeds. Chamorro et al. were investigating the effect of tannase on the content of 0, gallocatechin, epigallocatechin, catechin, epicatechin, procyanidins B1 and B2 as well as on the content of the galloylated forms of epigallocatechin, gallocatechin and epicatechin. They observed that the addition of tannases had a positive effect on the contents of gallic acid, gallocatechin, catechin, epicatechin, procyanidns B1 and B2 and a negative effect on the contents of galloylated forms of epigallocatechin, gallocatechin and epicatechin. This observation could be explained by the tannase’s ability to hydrolyze the ester bonds between flavan-3-ols and gallate. The effect of cellulose, pectinase and tannase on the total seed phenols was studied by Fernandez et al.. They concluded that the addition of these enzymes to the extraction mixture results in an increase of total phenols determined by the Folin–Cioceltau (FC) method. This method is not specific for polyphenols because FC reagent could react with other compounds present in the extracts. The total phenolic content (TPC) determined by the above mentioned method is only a measure of reduction state of the analyzed system. Thus, the obtained values do not necessarily demonstrate the actual state of composition and content of individual polyphenols. In both studies the extractions were performed in conditions described on the enzyme suppliers’ data sheets without optimization.

To the best of our knowledge, the optimization of enzyme-assisted extraction of polyphenols from grape marc seeds using oenological enzyme preparations had never been studied. The literature allows for the assumption that EAE using pectinases and cellulose can be a very efficient non toxic technique for the recovery of phenols from grape seeds. Thus, the objective of this study was the optimization of the extraction conditions for the recovery of polyphenols from grape seeds with the ability to use in industrial application applying different oenological enzyme preparations composed from cellulases and pectinases. For this purpose, Box–Behnken experimental design (BBD) was used with the enzyme dosage, temperature, extraction time and pH as independent experimental variables. The obtained seed extracts were analyzed by the HPLC method to determine the effect of these enzyme preparations on the content of individual grape seed polyphenols. The comparison of the new optimized EAE method was done to evaluate its efficiency.


