
Abstract

Six endophytic fungi were isolated from Cupressus torulosa D.Don and identified phenotypically and genotypically. The fungal cultures were further grown and the culture was extracted by two organic solvents methanol and ethyl acetate. The screening was carried out using the agar well diffusion method against human pathogen such as Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Bacillus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus. Isolated strain of Pestalotiopsis sp. was showing prominent antibacterial activity. The crude methanol and ethyl acetate extract of Pestalotiopsis sp. showed MIC of 6.25 mg/mL for S. typhimurium and S. aureus which showed its efficacy as a potent antimicrobial. The phytochemical screening revealed the existence of a diverse group of secondary metabolites in the crude extracts of the endophytic fungi that resembled those in the host plant extracts. On the basis of phenotypic characteristics and rDNA sequencing of the ITS region of the endophyte was identified as P. neglecta which turned out to be a promising source of bioactive compounds. There is little known about endophytes from C. torulosa D.Don. In this paper we studied in detail the identification of isolated endophytic fungi P. neglecta from C. torulosa D.Don and characterization of its active metabolite compounds. The partially purified second fraction (PPF) extracted from the fungal culture supernatant was subjected to gas chromatography followed by mass spectrometry which revealed the presence of many phytochemicals. These results indicate that endophytic fungi P. neglecta isolated from medicinal plants could be a potential source for bioactive compounds and may find potential use in pharmaceutical industry.



Introduction

An increase in the number of people in the world having health problems caused by various cancers, drug-resistant bacteria, parasitic protozoans, and fungi is a cause for alarm (Strobel 2003). Development of multiple drug-resistant microbes raised the need to search for new and novel antimicrobials for treatment of human diseases (Wise 2008). An intensive search for newer and more effective agents to deal with these disease problems is now under way and endophytes are a novel source of potentially useful medicinal compounds. Much of microbial diversity of nature remains to be explored, particularly marine microbial environments (Newman et al. 2003). Microorganisms have the ability to utilize various substrates as a consequence of the diversity of their biological and biochemical evolution (Fernandes et al. 2009). The solid substrates they use include, among others, live plants. Both bacteria and fungi are known to cooperate with many plants to form mutually beneficial associations. Actinomycetes and fungi, of all microorganisms studied, have been found to be the most prolific producers of secondary metabolites (Guanatilaka 2006).

There are enormous scopes exist for the recovery of novel fungal species, genera and biotypes from this ecological niche. To some estimate approximately 1.5 million fungal species exist in the world (Hawksworth 1991; Hawksworth 2001) while only 100,000 have been discovered and there may be at least one million species of endophytic fungi alone (Dreyfuss and Chapela 1994). In the last few years, considerable knowledge has been accumulated on the biology of endophytic microorganisms (Firakova et al. 2007). Endophytes comprise a large but little explored share of fungal diversity (Yuanab et al. 2011; Perottoab et al. 2013).

A range of microbial species are known to be endophytic, colonizing inter and intracellular spaces of tissues of higher plants without causing apparent damage on the plants in which they live. Often they have proven to be rich sources of bioactive natural products (Li et al. 2008; Molina et al. 2012). Mutualistic interactions between endophytes and host plants may result in fitness benefits for both partners (Kogel et al. 2006). The endophytes may provide protection and survival conditions to their host plant by producing a plethora of substances which, once isolated and characterized, may also have potential for use in industry, agriculture, and medicine (Porras-Alfaro and Bayman 2011).

Almost all the plant species growing in unexplored area on the earth are host to one or more endophytic organisms (Strobel and Daisy 2003). To date, only a few plants are investigated for their endophytic biodiversity and their potential to produce bioactive secondary metabolites. Studies have been conducted at different parts of the world about the endophytic biodiversity, taxonomy, reproduction, host ecology and their effect on host (Bandra et al. 2001). Currently, endophytes are viewed as outstanding sources of bioactive natural products, because many of them are occupying literally millions of unique biological niches growing in so many unusual environments.

Endophytic fungi are of biotechnological interest due to their potential as a source of secondary metabolites that has been proven useful for novel drug discovery (Yan et al. 2011). Antifungal and antibacterial activities of plant endophytic fungi have been reported by several groups (Liang et al. 2012; Gherbawy and Gashgari 2014; Idris et al. 2013; Bhardwaj et al. 2015). Endophytic fungi has been shown to produce several pharmacologically important compounds such as antimycotics steroid 22-triene-3β-ol (Metwaly et al. 2014), anticancer cajanol (Zhao et al. 2013), podophyllotoxin and kaempferol (Huang et al. 2014), anti-inflammatory ergoflavin (Deshmukh et al. 2009), antioxidant lectin (Sadananda et al. 2014), insecticidal heptelidic acid (Zhang et al. 2014), immunosuppressive sydoxanthone A, B (Song et al. 2013) and cytotoxic radicicol (Turbyville et al. 2006).

Metabolites produced by endophytes are being recognized as a versatile arsenal of antimicrobial agents. Some endophytes have been known to possess superior biosynthetic capabilities, owing to their presumable gene recombination with the host, while residing and reproducing inside the healthy plant tissues (Li et al. 2005). A high proportion of endophytic fungi (80 %) produce biologically active compounds in tests for antibacterial, fungicidal and herbicidal activities (Schulz et al. 2002). The continued development of new antimicrobial compounds is important to overcome the difficulties related to the treatment of infections caused by resistant pathogens in accordance with Petersen et al.. Thus, it can be said that endophytic fungi have emerged as an alternative source for the production of new antimicrobial agents.

Plants used in traditional medicine have played a very important role in the search for new bioactive strains of endophytic fungi, as it is possible that their beneficial characteristics are a result of the metabolites produced by their endophytic community (Kaul et al. 2012; Kusari et al. 2013). As higher plants are known to harbor endophytic fungi (Bhardwaj et al. 2015) that are believed to be associated with the production of pharmaceutically important products, in this context, the aims of this work were to characterize the fungal endophyte Pestalotiopsis sp. BAB-5510 associated with Cupressus torulosa D.Don from Pauri, Garhwal region of Uttarakhand and to detect cytotoxic and antimicrobial activities of these fungi against some pathogenic microbes.

Despite this potential, a repertoire of medicinal plants remains to be studied regarding their endophytic composition, for example C. torulosa D.Don. This is a well-known medicinal plant whose leaves have been proven to have anti-inflammatory, anticonvulsant, antimicrobial, and wound-healing properties (Leite et al. 2004, 2006; Carli et al. 2010; Luiz-Ferreira et al. 2011; Almeida et al. 2013; Chen et al. 2013; Bezerra dos Santos et al. 2015). Due to the medicinal properties of C. torulosa, this species was the focus in the present study for a search of endophytic fungi that is able to produce bioactive substances with antimicrobial activity and cytotoxic activity.

Due to the importance of secondary metabolite production by endophytic fungi, the study of these C. torulosa associated fungi provides greater understanding of its diversity. This study is the first report about the antimicrobial and cytotoxic activity of endophytic fungi residing in C. torulosa leaves in which the fungus Pestalotiopsis neglecta demonstrated the ability to produce bioactive agents with pharmaceutical potential, and may provide a new lead in the pursuit of new biological source of drug candidates.


