
Abstract

Anthocyanins are involved in many diverse functions in rice, but their benefits have yet to be clearly demonstrated. Our objective in this study was to identify anthocyanin-related genes in black rice plants. We identified anthocyanin-related genes in black rice plants using a combination of whole-genome resequencing, RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq), microarray experiments, and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Using multi-layer screening from 30 rice accessions, we identified 172,922 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 1276 differentially expressed genes that appear to be related to anthocyanin biosynthesis. We identified 18 putative genes from 172,922 SNPs using intensive selective sweeps. The 18 candidate genes identified from SNPs were not significantly correlated with the RNA-seq expression pattern or other well-known anthocyanin biosynthesis/metabolism genes. We also identified nine putative genes from 1276 differentially expressed genes using RNA-seq transcriptome analysis. In addition, we identified four phylogenetic groups from these nine candidate genes and 51 pathway-network genes. Finally, we verified nine anthocyanin-related genes using a newly designed microarray and semi-quantitative RT-PCR. We suggest that these nine identified genes appear to be related to the regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis and/or metabolism.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-018-1140-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Anthocyanins are involved in many diverse functions, but their benefits have yet to be clearly demonstrated (Mateus and de Freitas 2008; Shi and Xie 2014; Fernandes et al. 2015). In rice (Oryza sativa L.), anthocyanins are found in the aleurone layer of black rice and in the leaves of colored rice. Black rice pigments contain high levels of anthocyanins (Kim et al. 2011), which accumulate to give the grain its black color (He and Giusti 2010). Colored rice produces an anthocyanin that is associated with the red and purple coloration of the leaves (Kim et al. 2008). Anthocyanins are often used to indicate the health index of foods due to their antioxidant properties, which play important roles in preventing cancer, inflammation, and cardiovascular disease; controlling obesity; and alleviating diabetes (Kim et al. 2011; He and Giusti 2010; Kim et al. 2008; Kong et al. 2003).

In previous studies, anthocyanin-related genes have been identified as important regulators that utilize the middle steps of the flavonoid-biosynthetic pathway (Shih et al. 2008; Du et al. 2009; Shao et al. 2011). As next-generation sequencing technology advances, genome resequencing can reveal genomic variations, evolutionary history, and population structure, and can identify genomic loci responsible for phenotypic and physiological traits (Xu et al. 2012). Similarly, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and microarray analysis have been used to determine gene expression for genome-wide transcriptome profiling (Zhao et al. 2014; Mantione et al. 2014). Analysis of gene regulation related to anthocyanin biosynthesis has identified various gene families and transcriptome genes (Oikawa et al. 2015; Sweeney et al. 2006; Furukawa et al. 2007). The plant portal Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/) reports that the rice genome contains 15 genes involved in anthocyanin biosynthesis, and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) database reports 14 orthologous gene groups within the anthocyanin pathway.

Here, we report the identification of anthocyanin-related genes in black rice plants using genome resequencing, RNA-seq, and microarray experiments with reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) verification.


