
Abstract

A potent actinobacterial strain isolated from the marine samples of Bheemunipatnam beach, Visakhapatnam, India, was identified as Rhodococcus sp. VLD-10 using the conventional and genomic (16S rRNA) approaches. Bioactive compounds responsible for the antimicrobial activity of the strain were elucidated by cultivating the strain VLD-10 in a modified yeast extract-malt extract-lactose broth followed by subsequent chromatographic and spectroscopic analyses. Extraction, purification, and structural confirmation of five compounds, viz., benzoic acid, 2-nitrobenzaldehyde, 4-chlorobenzaldehyde, nonadeconoic acid, and 3-isopropylhexahydro-1H-pyrido[1,2-a] pyrazine-1,4(6H)-dione, from Rhodococcus sp. VLD-10 were fruitfully described. The bioactivity of the compounds isolated from the strain VLD-10 against Gram-positive as well as Gram-negative bacteria, yeast, and molds was tested and their minimum inhibition concentration was reported. Antibacterial activity of 3-isopropylhexahydro-1H-pyrido[1,2-a] pyrazine-1,4(6H)-dione is more prominent against Bacillus subtilis, B. cereus, B. megaterium, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, and Escherichia coli, whereas its antifungal spectrum showed less potency against yeast and fungi. This is the first report on the natural occurrence and bioactivity of 3-isopropylhexahydro-1H-pyrido[1,2-a] pyrazine-1,4(6H)-dione from Rhodococcus sp. VLD-10.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0576-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Microorganisms are capable of carrying out a tremendous variety of reactions and can adapt to a range of environments allowing them to be transplanted from nature to the laboratory where they can be grown on inexpensive carbon and nitrogen sources to produce valuable compounds (Narayana and Vijayalakshmi 2008; Manivasagan et al. 2013). Because of their biological activity, secondary metabolites of microbial origin are extremely important to our health and nutrition, and have a tremendous economic importance. The screening of microbial natural products continues to represent an important route to the discovery of novel chemicals, for development of new therapeutic agents and for evaluation of the potential of lesser-known or new bacterial taxa (Kurtboke and Wildman 1998; Ramesh and William 2012). Natural products or their derivatives remain the most significant source of novel medicines (Newman et al. 2003; Fenical 2006; Lam 2007; Manivasagan et al. 2013). Among the potential sources of natural products, bacteria are proven to be a predominantly prolific resource with a surprisingly small group of taxa accounting for the vast majority of compounds discovered (Keller and Zengler 2004). Among them, bacteria belonging to the order Actinomycetales (commonly called actinobacteria) are distributed ubiquitous in nature and account for more than 50% of the compounds reported in the Dictionary of Natural Products.

In world’s 70% water ecosystem, Indian marine environment is believed to have rich microbial diversity. However, the wealth of indigenous marine microflora has not been fully explored. Most of the studies on marine microorganisms have been limited to isolation, identification, and maintenance of these organisms on different culture media. Their biotechnological potentials are yet to be fully explored (Sivakumar et al. 2007; Manivasagan et al. 2013). East Coast of India is reported to be a major source of actinobacteria (Sambamurthy and Ellaiah 1974; Balagurunathan 1992; Dhanasekaran et al. 2005; Vijayakumar et al. 2007). Therefore, there is tremendous scope to identify new or rare marine microorganisms from this region and also to discover novel microbial metabolites with diverse biological activities (Dhanasekaran et al. 2005; Ramesh and Mathivanan 2009; Ramesh and William 2012). The recent discovery of novel secondary metabolites from taxonomically unique populations of marine actinobacteria suggested that these bacteria add an important new dimension to microbial natural product research. Continued efforts to characterize marine actinobacterial diversity and how adaptations to the marine environment affect secondary metabolite production will create a better understanding of the potential utility of these bacteria as a source of useful products for biotechnology (Jensen et al. 2015). These findings will hopefully encourage additional studies addressing the ecological roles of actinobacteria in the marine environment, their diversity, distribution, culture requirements, and evolutionary responses to life in the sea. In view of the significance of marine actinobacteria as potential producers of bioactive compounds, this study is mainly aimed to identify the potent strain, Rhodococcus sp. VLD-10, isolated from marine soil samples of Bheemili beach, Visakhapatnam, India, and to characterize the bioactive metabolites responsible for its antimicrobial activity.


