
Abstract

Farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FPPase) is an enzyme that catalyzes the condensation between one molecule of dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) and two molecules of isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) to produce farnesyl diphosphate (FPP). FPP is an important precursor in the isoprenoid synthesis pathway. In this study, the crystal structure of FPPase from Geobacillus stearothermophilus (GsFPPase) was determined at 2.31 Å resolution. The structure of GsFPPase shows a three-layered all α-helical fold and conserved functional domains similar to other prenyltransferases. We have analyzed the structural features of GsFPPase related to thermostability and compared it with those of human and avian mesophilic FPPases. “Semi-conserved” regions which appear to be possible features contributing to the thermostability of FPPase were found.



Introduction

Isoprenoids are a highly diverse group of compounds which play important roles in the physiological processes of all free-living organisms. The fundamental step in the biosynthesis of isoprenoids is the chain elongation of prenyl diphosphate precursors by prenyltransferases. These enzymes catalyze the successive condensation between isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP, C5) and allylic diphosphates to produce prenyl diphosphates with various chain lengths and stereochemistries, thus, they are commonly classified based on the chain length and the geometry of the double bond of the final product that is formed by the reaction (Ogura and Koyama 1998).

Farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FPPase; EC 2.5.1.10) is one of the prenyltransferases and occupies a central branch point in the prenyl chain elongation pathway. It catalyzes the condensations of IPP with dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP, C5) and with geranyl diphosphate (GPP, C10) to give the key precursor (2E, 6E)-farnesyl diphosphate (FPP, C15) as the final product (Eberhardt and Rilling 1975).

Because of its critical role in the pathway, FPPase has been used in both mechanistic and synthetic studies. Poulter and Rilling used FPPase from avian liver and porcine liver to study the mechanism of chain elongation (Poulter and Rilling 1978). Koyama et al. used porcine liver FPPase to develop a novel chiral synthesis method and successfully applied the method to the chiral synthesis of faranal and 4-methyl-juvenile hormone (Koyama et al. 1980; Kobayashi et al. 1980; Koyama et al. 1987). Also, Maki et al. showed that porcine liver FPPase can be used to synthesize the butterfly hair-pencil pheromone (Maki et al. 1995). These studies have demonstrated that FPPase has potential applications in the synthesis of a great variety of organic compounds. However, the practical uses of FPPase in industrial applications are limited due to the instability of the enzyme and the difficulty in obtaining it in significant amounts.

Thermostable FPPase is becoming an increasing necessity to provide an enzyme which is more stable and more compatible with industrial application. Genes encoding thermostable FPPases have been isolated and prepared from some thermophilic bacteria. For example, bifunctional enzyme farnesyl diphosphate/geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase and the gene encoding it were isolated from high thermophile Methanobacterium thermoauototrophicum, and the enzyme showed a high thermal stability (Chen and Poulter 1993). A gene encoding thermophilic FPPase was also isolated from medium thermophile Geobacillus stearothermophilus (Bacillus stearothermophilus) and was efficiently overexpressed in Escherichia coli host cells (Koyama et al. 1993).

Geobacillus stearothermophilus FPP synthase (GsFPPase) has been shown to display thermal stability properties. The enzyme is not deactivated even after heat treatment at 65 °C for 100 min. Although many years have passed since studies of GsFPPase began, the factors that determine its thermostable properties still remain unclear.

In their studies on the roles of cysteine residues in GsFPPase, Koyama et al. found that replacing Cys residue at position 73 with Phe caused the enzyme to become very sensitive to heat treatment (Koyama et al. 1994). Here, we verified the effect of Cys73 on the thermostability of GsFPPase by solving its crystal structure at a resolution of 2.31 Å and conducted thermal unfolding simulations.


