
Abstract

Electrodes based on graphite, graphene, and carbon nanomaterials have been used in the anode chamber of microbial fuel cells (MFCs). Carbon quantum dots (C-dots) are a class of versatile nanomaterials hitherto not reported in MFCs. C-dots previously synthesized from coconut husk were reported to possess hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups on their surface. The presence of these functional groups on a carbon matrix conferred on the C-dots the ability to conduct and transfer electrons. Formation of silver nanoparticles from silver nitrate upon addition of C-dots confirmed their reducing ability. DREAM assay using a mixed microbial culture containing C-dots showed a 172% increase in electron transfer activity and thus confirmed the involvement of C-dots in supplementing redox activity of a microbial culture. Addition of C-dots as a suspension in the anode chamber of an MFC resulted in a 22.5% enhancement in maximum power density. C-dots showed better performance as electron shuttles than methylene blue, a conventional electron shuttle used in MFCs.



Introduction

Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are microbe-catalyzed electrochemical systems that can breakdown organic compounds in wastewater and harness the electrons produced in the process. The anode chamber of an MFC containing microbes and the substrate (typically in the form of wastewater) is maintained under anaerobic conditions to facilitate the uptake of electrons by the electrode. The protons produced in the process move across a selectively permeable membrane to the cathode chamber containing the terminal electron acceptor. MFCs present a unified solution to the global environmental issues of wastewater management and clean energy production.

Transfer of electrons from microbes to the anode is a critical step in performance of an MFC (Rabaey et al. 2004). Inefficient electron transfer has been an impediment to scaling up MFCs for practical real-world applications (Yuan et al. 2011). Electron transfer can take place directly between microbes and the electrode or via naturally produced or artificially added electron mediators (Schröder 2007). It is essential to understand the mechanism of electron transfer to and from the small, insoluble molecules that function as electron shuttles (Stams et al. 2006) and mediate electron transfer in MFCs.

Characteristics of the anode, which determine the extent of harvest and utilization of electrons, have been described by Xie et al.. The anode provides a surface for colonization of microbes and serves as a conductor of electrons released from the oxidized substrates. Carbon is the most preferred anode material due to its versatility, conductivity and biocompatibility (Logan 2008). Different forms of carbon nanomaterials have been used as anode in MFCs (Ghasemi et al. 2013) to improve performance by providing a larger surface to volume ratio.

Carbon quantum dots (C-dots) are a class of “benign, abundant, and inexpensive” (Li et al. 2012) carbon nanomaterials, which have been used as sensors and catalysts in the areas of biomedicine and optronics (Wang and Hu 2014) but are hitherto unexplored in MFCs. The inherent ability of C-dots to donate and accept electrons forms the basis of the present study. This communication demonstrates the role of previously described (Chunduri et al. 2016) C-dots in microbial electron transfer and their application as an electron shuttle in the anode chamber of an MFC.


