
Abstract

Novel natural compounds endowed with sound bioactivities are currently the utmost need as leads toward drug discovery. For the first time, here, we report the presence of Amentoflavone (biflavonoid) in the leaves of Cassia fistula L. Structural characterization was carried out using ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer, Fourier transform infrared, nuclear magnetic resonance, and thin-layer chromatography. The isolated compound was further evaluated for its bioactivity. The compound demonstrated moderate cytotoxicity in liver carcinoma (HepG2) cells, and the comparative analysis for the standard and normal compound has also been validated. Antioxidant potential was assessed by DPPH assay. Furthermore, efficacy of the compound in the aforesaid assays asserts its bioactivity and subsequently its importance as a potent therapeutic. Our study strongly suggests that Amentoflavone present in the leaf extracts of C. fistula L. definitely holds promise in the pharmaceutical industry.



Introduction

The use of plants and their constituents in primary health care has ancient history as old as human beings. Various medicinal plants have proven therapeutics implication in the health management via antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-diabetic, and other biological activities (Rahmani et al. 2014a, 2014b; Rahmani and Aly 2015). Cassia fistula L. (Caesalpiniaceae) is commonly called Indian Laburnum and is native to India, Amazon, Sri Lanka, and extensively available in various countries, including Mauritius, South Africa, Mexico, China, West Indies, East Africa, and Brazil (Bahorun et al. 2005; Rajagopal et al. 2013). The main medicinal property of C. fistula L. is mild laxative suitable for children and pregnant women. It is also used as a purgative due to the wax aloin and a tonic and has been reported to treat many intestinal disorders, such as ulcers (Bhalodia et al. 2012). In the Indian literature, this plant has been described to be useful against skin diseases, liver troubles, tuberculosis glands, and its use in the treatment of hematemesis, pruritus, leucoderma, and diabetes and has also been suggested that C. fistula has anti-microbial and anthelminthic properties (Vasudevan et al. 2009; Panda et al. 2011; Siva 2007) and also possesses significant hepatoprotective activity (Das et al. 2008). C. fistula extract is used as an anti- periodic and anti-rheumatism, and the leaf extract is also indicated for its antitussive and wound healing properties (Senthil kumar et al. 2006). The several species of Cassia are known to produce a variety of phenolic metabolites with novel structures, especially flavonoids. Therefore, the objective of the study was to investigate the novel compound and their bioactivity in leaves of C. fistula. For the first time, a novel Amento flavonone has been identified in the leaves of C. fistula by systematic bioassay-guided fractionation of the ethanolic extract. The therapeutic efficacy of Amento flavonone has been reported in this paper through DPPH and cytotoxicity to HepG2 (human hepatic carcinoma) cell line. The present study explores the role of the novel compound obtained from the leaves ethanolic extract of C. fistula. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on Amento flavonone from Cassia fistula L.


