
Abstract

Consolidated bioprocess assures an efficient lignocellulosic conversion to fermentable sugars and subsequently to bioethanol. Such a single-step hydrolysis and anaerobic fermentation was achieved with acclimated Clostridium thermocellum DSM 1313 on different mildly pre-treated agricultural lignocellulosic residues without any additional enzymes/and strains. Acclimation was achieved by serially sub-culturing in increasing concentration of individual substrates, such as rice husk, sugarcane bagasse, and banana pseudostem in the standard media, with cellobiose as an adjunct. The acclimated cellulolytic thermophile exhibited an early log phase entry with enhanced growth compared to the direct inoculation experiments with unacclimated culture. Around 672 mg/g of reducing sugar was produced from sugarcane bagasse media and 636 mg/g from rice husk media and 513 mg/g from banana pseudostem media with the acclimated organism. Bioethanol production also doubled in experiments with serially acclimated cultures, with a maximum of 1.21 and 1.0 g/L ethanol titre from sugarcane bagasse and rice husk, respectively. The serial acclimation experiments have increased the saccharification potentials of the organism towards the respective lignocellulosic substrates and also enhanced the bioethanol production.



Introduction

The first-generation biofuels have promoted edible crops as feedstocks for bioethanol production. The seasonal, regional, and rate of growth variations of the edible feed stocks have been reported to lead inconsistent supply for bioethanol production (Kim and Dale 2004). Today, second-generation biofuels are considered as advanced biofuels, since the feedstock generally used is not food crops, such as in first-generation biofuels. Various methods, such as physico-chemical/and enzymatic hydrolytic techniques, have been used for converting lignocellulosic composite to reducing sugars for bioethanol production. The widely adopted pre-treatments for lignocellulosic substrates (LCSs), such as steam explosion, acid hydrolysis, and ammonia fibre expansion, are often expensive and limit commercialization. In addition, in most cases, pre-treatments generate toxic substances necessitating a detoxification stage before hydrolysis (Maki et al. 2009; Brodeur et al. 2011).

Microbial hydrolysis is a promising approach that reduces time and cost in LCS hydrolysis in comparison with the non-microbial processing techniques. Only a few known microorganisms have the capability to degrade and hydrolyse recalcitrant plant biomass. Cellulolytic thermophiles are increasingly researched due to the high tolerance level to fluctuating pH, temperature, and environmental changes. Their enzymes take in a crucial role in industries due to its thermo-stability (Pandey 2011). Clostridium thermocellum is an anaerobic, spore-forming cellulolytic thermophile producing multi-enzyme complex consisting of various hydrolytic enzymes as well as extracellular individual free enzymes. Having both these enzyme systems is a rare characteristic in the microbial world due to which C. thermocellum is an efficient biomass degrader along with ethanolgenic capabilities (Wilson 2011; Paye et al. 2016). Application of C. thermocellum simplifies the LCS bioprocess by simultaneous hydrolysis and fermentation of the hydrolysate within the same pot. The consolidated process involves least investment in enzyme production, cellulose hydrolysis, and enzyme recovery. However, irrespective of the technological advancements, the technical and economic constrains of converting the cellulosic material into fermentable sugars for the production of biofuels remain unsolved.

Researches are being carried out to enhance the hydrolytic capability of the wild strain C. thermocellum. C. thermocellum with superior hydrolytic capabilities is, however, reported to produce low-level cellulosomes (You et al. 2012). Even though the thermophile is claimed to completely convert pure cellulose to ethanol, it does not produce similar results with other cellulosic substrates (Pandey 2011). This work deduces the effect of microbial hydrolysis of C. thermocellum after acclimation towards LCSs. The efficiency of microbial hydrolysis was established in terms of released reducing sugars yield, recovery of residual LCS, and final ethanol concentration. Several mildly pre-treated agricultural residues were microbially hydrolysed using wild and acclimated C. thermocellum DSM1313 without any additional enzyme or chemical supplements.


