
Abstract

The strain Streptomyces coelicoflavus BC 01 was isolated from mangrove soil and used as inoculum for submerged fermentation. The fermented broth was extracted with ethyl acetate, the crude extract was subjected to silica gel column chromatography and the homogeneity of the isolated fractions was determined by TLC and then subjected to RP-HPLC for their purity. The purification steps led to the isolation of three pure bioactive compounds named as BC 01_C1, BC 01_C2 and BC 01_C3. The chemical structure of these three compounds was established on the basis of their spectroscopic studies like UV, IR, 1H and 13C NMR and GC–MS data by comparison with reference data from literature. The structure of the compound BC 01_C1 was established as 5-amino-2-(6-(2-hydroxyethyl)-3-oxononyl) cyclohex-2-enone. The compound BC 01_C2 was established as8-(aminomethyl)-7-hydroxy-1-(1-hydroxy-4-(hydroxylmethoxy)-2,3-dimethylbutyl)-2-methyl dodecahydro phenanthren-9(1H)-one and the compound BC 01_C3 was established as1-((E)-2-ethylhex-1-en-1-yl)2-((E)-2-ethylidenehexyl)cyclohexane-1,2-dicarboxylate. The MIC values of the three isolated compounds (BC 01_C1, BC 01_C2 and BC 01_C3) were found between 12.5–75 μg/ml for bacteria and 50–125 μg/ml for fungi used in this study. These compounds also possess in vitro antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities.



Introduction

The development of resistance to multiple drugs is a major problem in the treatment of infections by pathogenic microorganisms. This antimicrobial resistance is presently an urgent focus of research and novel bioactive compounds are necessary to combat these pathogens. Microbial natural products are the most important source of new medicines. Among the potential sources of natural products bacteria are very important (Newman and Cragg 2007). However, the ability to produce anti-infective agents is limited to 5 of the 53 known phyla of bacteria. The most productive are members of the class actinobacteria; approximately 7000 compounds reported in the dictionary of natural products are of actinobacterial origin. Therefore, pharmaceutical industries are mainly focused on production of actinomycetes because of their ability to produce secondary metabolites (Berdy 2005). The secondary metabolites are organic compounds that are not directly involved in the normal growth, development or reproduction of the producing organism (Martín et al. 2005). The secondary metabolites are secreted during the generation of aerial hyphae from the vegetative mycelium (Maguelez et al. 2000). The medical uses of these secondary metabolites are not just limited to antibiotics but also include antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anticancer, antiparasitics, immunosuppressant agents, insecticides, herbicides, vitamins and enzymes, etc. (Newman and Cragg 2007). Other secondary metabolites produced by actinomyctes such as aliphatic alcohols, lactones, biogenic sulphides, ketones, esters, thioesters, lactones, furanones and isoprenoids are important to the chemical and pharmaceutical industries (Zaitlin and Watson 2006).

The genus Streptomyces is an economically important group of organisms among actinomycetes and they are the key source for wide range of biologically active compounds (Berdy 2005). About three-quarters of all the known commercially and medicinally useful antibiotics and several agriculturally important compounds were obtained from the Streptomyces sp. (Cundlife 1989). Furthermore, approximately 60% of the antibiotics discovered in the year 1990 and most of the antibiotics used in agriculture are from the genus Streptomyces. They have the ability to synthesize many biological activity compounds; hence they are extensively used as an important research subject from the academicians and as well as industrialists (Tanaka and Mura 1993). The present study describes the extraction, purification and the structural elucidation of three bioactive compounds from a liquid culture broth of the strain Streptomyces coelicoflavus BC 01 which was isolated from mangrove soil of Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, India. The biological activities of these three compounds are also addressed in the study.


