
Abstract

This study was undertaken to assess the antibacterial efficacy of lactobacilli isolated from curd and human milk samples. Identities of thirty-one different lactobacilli (20 from curd and 11 from human milk) were confirmed by genus-specific PCR and 16S rRNA-based sequencing. These strains belonged to five species, Lactobacillus casei, L. delbrueckii, L. fermentum, L. plantarum, and L. pentosus. Antibacterial activities of cell-free supernatants (CFSs) of all the Lactobacillus isolates were estimated through standard agar-well diffusion assay, against commonly occurring food-borne and clinically important human pathogens. None of the lactobacilli cell-free supernatant (CFS) exhibited inhibitory activity against four pathogens, namely Staphylococcus aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli, and Klebsiella pneumoniae. Bacillus cereus, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, and Shigella flexneri were moderately inhibited by majority of CFSs, whereas, weak activity was observed against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Proteus mirabilis. CFS of some of the curd isolates displayed antagonistic activity against Streptococcus mutans; however, human milk lactobacilli did not displayed any inhibitory activity against them. As expected, Nisin (Nisaplin®) showed inhibitory activity against Gram-positive, S. aureus, B. cereus, and L. monocytogenes. Interestingly, few of the examined CFSs exhibited inhibitory activities against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogens. Findings from this study support the possibility to explore the tested lactobacilli and their CFSs as natural bio-preservatives, alone or in combination with approved bacteriocins in food and pharma formulations after validating their safety.



Introduction

The perception of functional food with physiologically active components has been recognized in the history of mankind. Still, the renewed interest of consumers toward ready to eat, minimally processed and preserved food with additional physiological benefit has raised challenges for the food industry. Thereby, within the last few decades, the use of microorganism and their products for the preservation of food has largely arrested the interest of manufacturers and prompted food technologists/researchers to explore the application of natural compounds for the preservation of food products (Georgieva et al. 2015). To compensate this need, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) intends to be an appropriate candidate due to its varied antimicrobial, bio-therapeutic and preservation properties (Arena et al. 2016; Mangiapane et al. 2015). LABs are widespread in nature and reside in a variety of natural habitats, ranging from plants to the mammalian oral, gastrointestinal and vaginal cavities (Benavides et al. 2016). There is increasing interest in certain LABs, especially Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium spp. which are extensively explored in the area of food, either as technological starters in the fermented products, as probiotics, or as potential food preservatives (Altay et al. 2013). Additionally, they help in maintaining the normal intestinal permeability and restoration of gut microflora, enhancement of the intestine’s immunological barrier functions and improvement of the intestinal inflammatory response (Jose et al. 2015). Many studies and reports have also documented the clinical importance of beneficial microbes in different clinical ailments, such as allergic pathologies (atopic eczema and rhinitis), diarrhea, necrotizing enterocolitis, inflammatory bowel disease, type 2 diabetes, and viral infections (Panwar et al. 2013; Presti et al. 2015; Thakur et al. 2016).

The antimicrobial effect of lactobacilli is primarily linked to the production of organic acids, such as lactic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid, and sometimes hydrogen peroxide, bacteriocins, and antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) with a variable range of action (Cortes-Zavaleta et al. 2014; Gemechu 2015). Strains of lactobacilli can produce organic acids through heterofermentative pathways. These acids may perhaps interact with the cell membrane and induce intracellular acidification and protein denaturation. The antibacterial effect of lactic acid is probably due to the physiological and morphological changes induced in the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane, resulting in leakage of cytoplasmic contents (Wang et al. 2015). Hydrogen peroxide can act as precursor to the production of bactericidal free radicals (superoxide and hydroxyl), leading to DNA damage and peroxidation of membrane lipids enhancing their membrane permeability (Aminnezhad et al. 2015). Nisin, the most frequently referenced bacteriocin is known to inhibit cell wall synthesis and induce pore formation, which rapidly kills cells. LAB-derived bacteriocins are also known to target bacterial membrane integrity and septum formation during mitosis (Cavera et al. 2015).

Beneficial effects of lactobacilli, including inhibition of Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogenic and spoilage bacteria have been reported by many researchers (Song et al. 2014; Zhu et al. 2014). The therapeutic role of lactobacilli in controlling the infections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Salmonella spp. has been reported. Combined action of Lactobacillus and antibiotic(s) has been shown to be successful in the management of Helicobacter pylori infection (Homan and Orel 2015; Safavi et al. 2016). A combination therapy, including probiotic and antibiotic may offer better antimicrobial activity and lessen the dose of antibiotic required. Further, it may also help in replenishment of the intestinal flora thereby providing benefit to the host and abating the side effects of antibiotics (Aminnezhad et al. 2015).

Outbreaks related to food-borne diseases associated with the consumption of fresh and minimally processed fruits and vegetables, primarily due to E. coli, Salmonella spp., S. aureus, and L. monocytogenes, have increased dramatically. Presently, modified atmosphere packaging (MAP), chemical preservatives, and refrigeration are among the most preferred tools for extending the shelf-life of food items (Siroli et al. 2015; Li et al. 2016). As a result of recent development in probiotic research, in terms of their efficacy, mechanism of action, and their role in gut microbiota-host interactions, probiotics offers an innovative approach for development of novel probiotic formulations for the management of specific diseases (Grover et al. 2012). The antagonistic activity of these microorganisms and/or their extracellular antibacterial agents (cell-free supernatants) also offers valuable prospects for their application in food preservation (Kecerova et al. 2004), as feed supplements, or in veterinary medicine (Cortes-Zavaleta et al. 2014). As LAB enjoy the ‘generally recognized as safe’ (GRAS) status, their metabolites have captivated substantial interest as natural drugs in recent years (Reis et al. 2012). Milk, besides harboring several natural antimicrobial components, is a favorable source of several beneficial (commensal, mutualistic and/or potentially probiotic) microorganisms, which also assists in the development and initial colonization of the infant gut (Fernandez et al. 2012; Panwar 2014; Reis et al. 2016). Most of the commercial probiotics to date have been of food/dairy or human fecal origin (Ng et al. 2015). Although there are research findings supporting the antimicrobial efficacy of lactobacilli from dairy products, scanty data are available regarding the antibacterial potential of human milk lactobacilli. In lieu of the above facts, the present study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of CFS of curd and human milk lactobacilli against the commonly occurring food-borne and human pathogens.


