
Abstract

Ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs) are a group of enzymes originally isolated from plants that possess the ability to damage ribosomes in an irreversible manner, leading to inhibition of protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells. In this study, we aimed to purify recombinant RIPs, investigate their function in the treatment of bacterial infection, and determine their toxicity in mice. We employed a pMAL protein fusion and purification system using E. coli transformed with a plasmid containing MBP-tagged MAP30 cDNA. MBP-tagged MAP30 was purified using a modified novel protocol to effectively produce highly active MAP30 of high purity. In an acute toxicity study in mice, no mortality occurred at doses lower than 1.25 mg/kg. MAP30 at both 0.42 and 0.14 mg/kg induced anti-MAP30 IgG, which reached a maximum titer at week 3. In conclusion, recombinant MAP30 prepared using our purification method possesses bioactivity, and has a synergistic bacteria-killing effect that can significantly reduce the required dosages of chloramphenicol and erythromycin. Therefore, when MAP30 is used in combination with chloramphenicol or erythromycin, it may of benefit in terms of reducing the side effects of the antibiotics, as lower concentrations of antibiotics are required.



Introduction

Ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs) are N-glycosidases that were initially isolated from plants. RIPs have potential cytotoxic effects, as they can inhibit protein synthesis by irreversible inactivation of eukaryotic ribosomal RNA (for review see Reyes et al. 2012; Puri et al. 2012). RIPs can be classified into three groups based on their primary structure: type 1 RIPs are single-chain proteins with a molecular weight of about 30 kD; type 2 RIPs are proteins of 60–65 kD that are composed of two chains, an A-chain with rRNA N-glycosidase activity linked to a lectin-like B chain via a disulfide bond; and type 3 RIPs are synthesized as proenzymes and require proteolysis to remove a short internal segment, thus transforming the inactive precursor into an active RIP (Xia et al. 2003; Girbes et al. 2004). In the last 20 years, many researchers have reported that RIPs obtained from different plants exhibit a variety of biological activities, comprising broad spectrum anti-viral (Wang and Tumer 2000), anti-tumor (Sha et al. 2013), and anti-fungal effects through action against fungal ribosomes (Park et al. 2002) and antibacterial (Vivanco et al. 1999), immunosuppressive, embryotoxigenic (Ng et al. 1992), cytotoxic (Battelli 2004) and several enzymatic activities. The most well-known activity of RIPs is inhibition of protein synthesis via N-glycosidase action on the eukaryotic 28S rRNA (Peumans et al. 2001). Recently, it has been shown that antimicrobial peptides, such as a cryptic peptide named PDL440-65 (Pizzo et al. 2015), play key roles in the antibacterial activity of RIPs. Additionally, the toxicity of RIPs to animals is highly variable, though a correlation has been established between cytotoxicity and toxicity to animals. Type I and non-toxic type 2 RIPs have a comparable cytotoxicity, which is three orders of magnitude lower than that of toxic type 2 RIPs (Battelli 2004).

Mormodica charantia (MC) is a medical plant indigenous to China, and is also widely distributed in Southeast Asia, Africa and certain areas of South America (Fang and Ng 2011). The fruit and seed crude extracts of MC contain large numbers of medicinal components, including cucurbitane-type triterpenoids, linolenic acids, potato- and squash-type protease inhibitors, and type 1 and type 2 RIPs, which have been revealed to exert multiple biological actions (Meng et al. 2012b). MAP30 was first purified from the seeds of MC (Lee-Huang et al. 1990) and has been demonstrated to possess an excellent anti-HIV activity, part of the underlying mechanism of which has been studied. In addition, MAP30 purified from MC has been demonstrated to have a high activity against the herpes simplex virus (HSV) (Bourinbaiar and Lee-Huang 1996), and has been shown to inhibit the proliferation of AIDS-related lymphoma cells infected with herpes simplex virus-8 (HHV-8) by downregulating cellular gene expressions related to uncontrolled proliferation (Sun et al. 2001). It also inhibits the cell proliferation of a panel of tumor cells in vitro and in vivo (Fang and Ng 2011; Fang et al. 2012a, 2012b). Taken together, previous research has indicated that anti-viral activities are the best-characterized effects of MAP30, especially against HIV.

Although RIPs have been isolated from the seeds of MC, the major ingredient has been identified as α-momorcharin, and the amount of MAP30 is not significant (Meng et al. 2012a). To avoid the inconvenience and impurity experienced when using traditional purification methods, recombinant MAP30 has recently been produced and purified using prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems. The results demonstrated that non-glycosylated MAP30 protein is as active as the glycosylated natural protein, and recombinant MAP30 possesses anti-HIV, anti-HBV, anti-tumor and apoptosis induction activities (Lee-Huang et al. 1995; Fan et al. 2008, 2009). Recent studies have also revealed that MAP30 exerts activities against the herpes simplex virus and pathogenic fungus (Akkouh et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016), and can induce cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in human lung carcinoma cells (Fan et al. 2015). However, the effects of recombinant MAP30 in terms of antibacterial activities and possible replacement of antibiotics are unknown, and the toxicity and immunogenicity of MAP30 have also never been studied.

In this study, we developed a new method for purification of insoluble (inclusion body) MAP30 protein, and studied its possible application in the treatment of bacterial infection and its potentiation activity, in addition to evaluating its toxicity in mice.


