
Abstract

Xinjiang, a region of high salinity and drought, is a host to many arid and semi-arid plants. Many of these plants including Ferula spp. have indigenous pharmaceutical histories. As many of the medicinal properties of plants are in tandem with the associated microorganisms residing within the plant tissues, it is advisable to explore the endophytic potential of such plants. In the present study, diversity of culturable bacteria isolated from medicinal plants Ferula songorica collected from Hebukesaier, Xinjiang were analyzed. A total of 170 endophytic bacteria belonging to three phyla, 15 orders, 20 families and 27 genera were isolated and characterized by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The phylum Actinobacteria constitutes a major portion of the endophytic microbes isolated from the plant Ferula songorica (107 isolates). Overall endophytic species richness of the sample was 58 taxa while the sample has statistical values of 4.02, 0.97, 0.65 and 16.55 with Shannon’s, Simpson, Species evenness and Margalef, respectively. Root tissues were found to be more suitable host for endophytes as compared to leaf and stem tissues. Among these endophytic strains, 88 % can grow on nitrogen-free media, 19 % solubilize phosphate, while 26 and 40 % are positive for production of protease and cellulase, respectively. The results confirm that the medicinal plant Ferula songorica represents an extremely rich reservoir for the isolation of diverged bacteria with potential for growth promoting factors and biologically active compounds including enzymes.



Introduction

Ferula of the family Umbelliferae is a genus of about 180 species of flowering plants and are native to Mediterranean, central Asia and its adjacent areas (Pimenov and Leonov 2004). Twenty-six of these species are found in Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (People’s Republic of China). Among them, the variety Ferula songorica are distributed in several places of Xinjiang including Hebukesaier, Emin county, Toli county, Yumin county and Tahcheng. Traditionally, they are being utilized for treatments of digestive disorders, rheumatism, headache, dizziness, toothache, etc. (Sun et al. 2013). Excessive excavation for medicinal purposes and man-made destruction during the recent years have, however, severely reduced the number of wild Ferula plants, and have even led to extinction of some varieties. It has now come to a stage that it is almost impractical to conserve Ferula plants through artificial cultivation, and therefore, a proper mechanism should be enforced to protect these precious medicinal resources including Ferula songorica.

One such mechanism is to explore the biotechnological potential of the microbial communities residing within the floral resources that are commonly referred to as endophytes. Endophytes have been proven to show positive effects on the host plants by serving as growth promoter, insect and pest repellents, antimicrobial agents against plant pathogens and stress modulators (Ryan et al. 2008; Staniek et al. 2008; Nagabhyru et al. 2013; Rai et al. 2014). A deeper look on endophytes also revealed that they are a source of various bioactive substances that find importance to ecology, medicine, pathology and agriculture (Wang et al. 2008). For example, an endophytic Promicromonospora sp. isolated from Artemisia annua in Yunnan was found to be proteinase and cellulase-producer (Li 2010). Endophytic bacterial strains Isoptericola rhizophila, Nitratireductor shengliensis, Paenibacillus lautus and Staphylococcus xylosus associated with halophytes from Xinjiang possess phosphate-solubilizing activities (Huang et al. 2010; Wang 2015).

Of the myriad ecosystems on earth, those with the greatest general biodiversity seem also to have the greatest number and the greatest diversity of endophytes (Strobel et al. 2004). Till date, only a few plants have ever been completely studied in relation to their endophytic biology. The necessity of finding new and beneficial endophytic microorganisms among the wide diversity of plants in different ecosystems is hence considerable. Xinjiang, a typical arid environment, is located in the border areas of northwest China and falls in the center of the Eurasian region. Endophytes adapting this special environment are likely to produce special metabolites. It is, therefore, necessary to explore these special endophytic resources of arid and extremely arid desert habitats. The present study involved the isolation of endophytes associated with medicinal plant Ferula songorica, analyzed the species richness and distribution pattern among the different tissues of the plant. In addition, the plant growth promoting traits and their ability to produce industrial enzymes were studied. The present study, in a small way, will help in conserving the Ferula plant from mass-scale excavation by exploiting the associated endophytes instead of the plant itself.


