
Abstract

Six bacteria strains from heavy-metal-polluted ramie rhizosphere soil were isolated through Cd2+ stress, which were numbered as JJ1, JJ2, JJ10, JJ11, JJ15, and JJ18. Sequence alignment and phylogenic analysis showed that strain JJ1 belonged to Pseudomonas, strain JJ2 belonged to Cupriavidus, strains JJ11 and JJ15 belonged to Bacillus, and strains JJ10 and JJ18 belonged to Acinetobacter. The tolerance capability of all the strains was the trend of Pb2+ > Zn2+ > Cu2+ > Cd2+, the maximum tolerance concentration to Cd2+ was 200 mg/L, to Pb2+ was 1600 mg/L, to Zn2+ was 600 mg/L, and to Cu2+ was 265 mg/L. Strains JJ1, JJ11, JJ15, and JJ18 could grow well under pH 9.0, and strains JJ2, JJ11, and JJ18 could grow well under 7% of NaCl. The results showed that as a whole these strains had high environmental adaptability. This is the first report that heavy-metal-tolerant bacteria were found from ramie rhizosphere soil, which could be as a foundation to discover the relationship between ramie, rhizosphere bacteria and heavy metals.



Introduction

Over exploitation for mineral resources has overloaded the endurance capability of the environment, the pollution caused by the release of heavy metals during mining is getting more and more serious (Cheng 2003). The heavy metals accumulated in soil are absorbed and accumulated in plants, and then transferred into human body through food chains. Which is seriously harmful for human health, some cancers and diseases are hence induced (Cuningham et al. 1995). The technologies applied with physical and chemical methods to restore polluted soils have been carried on since 1980s (Ellis et al. 2003). These technologies, to a certain extent, can restore the polluted soil, but the processes are complicated and secondary pollution might be caused (Chunfa et al. 2014; Wenqing et al. 2014).

Compared with physical and chemical methods, bio-restoration technology is gotten attention considerably because of its advantages of low cost, little harmfulness for environment, and high efficiency (Hong et al. 2013). The technology with the combination application of plant-microorganism is the most hot research topic on restoring the heavy-metal-polluted soils (Glick 2003; Hooda 2007).

Most heavy metals are toxic for cell growth, such as Cd, Hg, and Pb, but some microorganisms can endure, resist, and absorb heavy metals by changing valence state, metabolic pathway, producing secondary metabolites, etc. (Braud et al. 2006; Yingli et al. 2013). Large quantity of microorganisms which can resist heavy metals are isolated from soil, most of them are bacteria. The main heavy-metal-resistant bacteria existing in soil are Acinetobacter, Achromobacter, Azospirillum, Alcaligenes, Pseudomonas, Psychrobacter, Bacillus, etc. (Gray and Smith 2005; Ying et al. 2013).

As an important fiber crop growing widely in south of China, ramie (Boehmeria nivea (L.) Gaudich.) is a perennial plant with strong roots, which is easy to form a stationary rhizosphere environment. This crop can grow well in heavy-metal-polluted soils such as mining areas, heavy metals are accumulated mainly in its roots, stems, and leaves (Jianping et al. 2003; Ying et al. 2005). When stressed with the mixture of Cd, Sb, and Pb, the absorption tendency in ramie plants is Cd > Sb > Pb, the highest accumulation aboveground parts are up to 335.74, 157.55, and 92.31 mg/kg respectively, which shows that ramie has good accumulation and transference capability for Cd/Sb/Pb (Guiyuan et al. 2012). The average accumulations of Cd, Pb, As, Sb, Zn, and Cu are up to 0.11, 1.17, 0.72, 7.97, 6.71, and 1.69 kg/hm2 respectively in ramie planted experimentally in three mine areas of Shimen, Lengshuijiang, and Liuyang in Hunan Province of China (Wei et al. 2011). Ramie is not food crop with strong heavy-metal-tolerance and environmental adaptability, compared with food crops and other plants with low mass yields, it is a much preferable plant to restore heavy-metal-polluted soils.

In this paper, some heavy-metal-resistant bacteria were isolated and identified from ramie rhizospheric soil around mine refinery of Zhuzhou Smelter Group Co., Ltd. in Hunan province of China. The tolerance to heavy metals, the adaptability of pH, and salinity were investigated so as to lay a foundation for discovering the relationship metabolism between ramie, rhizosphere bacteria, and heavy metals, and also for restoring the polluted soils by applying the combination function of ramie and rhizosphere bacteria.

Soil sample origin

The rhizospheric soil samples were shaken off from the roots of ramie growing around Zhuzhou Smelter Group Co., Ltd. in Hunan province of China. The ramie plants were growing in the soils covered with mine dust about 10–15 cm of thickness. The soils were collected in sterile bags packed in a portable ice box with −4 °C, and then delivered to the laboratory within 1 h.


