
Abstract

After screening marine actinomycetes isolated from sediment samples collected from the Arctic fjord Kongsfjorden for potential anticancer activity, an isolate identified as Streptomyces artemisiae MCCB 248 exhibited promising results against the NCI-H460 human lung cancer cell line. H460 cells treated with the ethyl acetate extract of strain MCCB 248 and stained with Hoechst 33342 showed clear signs of apoptosis, including shrinkage of the cell nucleus, DNA fragmentation and chromatin condensation. Further to this treated cells showed indications of early apoptotic cell death, including a significant proportion of Annexin V positive staining and evidence of DNA damage as observed in the TUNEL assay. Amplified PKS 1 and NRPS genes involved in secondary metabolite production showed only 82% similarity to known biosynthetic genes of Streptomyces, indicating the likely production of a novel secondary metabolite in this extract. Additionally, chemical dereplication efforts using LC–MS/MS molecular networking suggested the presence of a series of undescribed tetraene polyols. Taken together, these results revealed that this Arctic S. artemisiae strain MCCB 248 is a promising candidate for natural products drug discovery and genome mining for potential anticancer agents.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-017-0610-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Microorganisms have been the source of many chemotherapeutics used in cancer treatment, and amongst them, actinomycetes are the most promising source organisms. Actinomycetes account for about 45% of all microbial secondary metabolites, of which 7600 (80%) are produced by Streptomyces (Bérdy 2005). Over the years, the rate of discovery of new bioactive compounds has reduced, but the rediscovery of known compounds has increased (Fenical et al. 1999). Hence there is a need for bioprospecting of unexplored or underexplored habitats for unique and rare microorganisms, as these can be expected to yield a higher percentage of novel metabolites with desirable bioactivities (Bredholt et al. 2008; Pathom-aree et al. 2006). The Arctic region remains one of the least well-explored geographical locations on Earth for novel bioactive metabolites. Herein, we report on the isolation and screening of actinomycetes from sediment collected from an Arctic fjord and discovery of the production of potential anticancer natural products.


