
Abstract

Catharanthus roseus is an important medicinal plant known for its pharmacological qualities such as antimicrobial, anticancerous, antifeedant, antisterility, antidiabetic activities. More than 130 bioactive compounds like vinblastine, vindoline and vincristine have been synthesized in this plant. Extensive studies have been carried out for optimization regeneration and transformation protocols. Most of the protocol described are laborious and time-consuming. Due to sophisticated protocol of regeneration and genetic transformation, the production of these bioactive molecules is less and not feasible to be commercialized worldwide. Here we have optimized the efficient protocol for regeneration and transformation to minimize the time scale and enhance the transformation frequency through Agrobacterium and sonication-assisted transformation (SAAT) method. In this study, hypocotyl explants responded best for maximal production of transformed shoots. The callus percentage were recorded 52% with 1.0 mg L−1 (BAP) and 0.5 mg L−1 (NAA) while 80% shoot percentage obtained with 4.0 mg L−1 (BAP) and 0.05 mg L−1 (NAA). The microscopic studies revealed that the expression of GFP was clearly localized in leaf tissue of the C. roseus after transformation of pRepGFP0029 construct. Consequently, transformation efficiency was revealed on the basis of GFP localization. The transformation efficiency of SAAT method was 6.0% comparable to 3.5% as conventional method. Further, PCR analysis confirmed the integration of the nptII gene in the transformed plantlets of C. roseus.



Introduction

Catharanthus roseus (L.) is a dicotyledonous medicinal plant naturalized in many countries like India, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, USA, Australia and most of the European region. The plant is cultivated worldwide for an ornamental purpose (Mujib et al. 2014). The important anticancer pharmaceuticals, vinblastine and vincristine, are also produced in very small quantities within the aerial parts of the Catharanthus roseus. The high cost of isolating the drugs has led to research efforts to increase the alkaloid content of C. roseus cell cultures, tissue cultures and seedlings.

The metabolic engineering of C. roseus strives is used to overcome the strict regulation of the alkaloid biosynthetic pathway. The alkaloid biosynthesis pathway in C. roseus is very complex and produces approximately 130 different alkaloids (Morgan et al. 2000). The high pharmaceutical cost associated with vinblastine and vincristine is a result of the very low quantities in which they are produced in planta and the isolation of these compounds from extracts. A total of 1000 kg of leaf and stem materials are required to produce 1 g and 20 mg vinblastine and vincrestine, respectively, (Facchini and De Luca 2008). Biosynthesis of these compounds occurs in five different subcellular compartments and three or more different cell types. It requires at least 35 intermediates and 30 enzymatic steps for biosynthesis of vinblastine and vincristine (Schröder et al. 1999; Lange et al. 2000; Morgan et al. 2000; Peebles et al. 2009). Due to low content (~0.0003%) of vinblastine and vincristine and expensive cost, the drugs could not be commercialized in global market. The straight chemical synthesis is not feasible due to chemical structure complexity and stereochemistry (Lange et al. 2000). Several investigators have carried out biotechnological efforts at in vitro level to elucidate the biosynthetic pathway and its genes to enhance the production of these drugs by genetic modulation of plant (van Der Heijden et al. 2004; Liscombe et al. 2010). Due to ineffective transformation and regeneration protocols, the rate of transformation is quite low. Therefore, we have developed an efficient regeneration and sonication-assisted Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation method for C. roseus.


