
Abstract

Metal nanoparticles obtained from green route are gaining significant prominence as a result of their potential applications in nanomedicine and material engineering. Overall metal nanoparticles studied, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) clutch prominent place in nanoparticles research field. Herein, we have reported the green synthesis of Saccharum officinarum leaf biomass extract-mediated synthesis of AgNPs. Initial nanoparticle production was confirmed by visual observation as color change from light yellow to bright brown color with yellow shade and spectrophotometrically at 450 nm and the various reaction conditions were optimized. The FTIR spectra of the biomass extract and synthesized AgNPs authorized the presence of phyto constituents as capping agent. The High Resolution-Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM) analyses confirm the morphology and the average particle size of AgNPs as ~28.2 nm. The crystalline nature oxide state and mean particle diameter of AgNPs were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) pattern and face-centered cubic (FCC). The obtained AgNPs show moderate to good antifungal activity against Phytophthora capsici, Colletotrichum acutatum and Cladosporium fulvum as 10, 12 and 14 mm zones of inhibition against synthesized AgNPs at 250 μg/well, respectively.



Introduction

Nanotechnology is an emerging field of science and technology utilized for manufacturing of new materials with different structural and physical properties (Logeswari et al. 2015). The nanomaterials are applied in various aspects such as cosmetics, biomedical, food packaging, drug-gene delivery, environment, optics, chemical industries, electronics, space industries, energy science, photo electrochemistry and catalysis (Ahmed et al. 2016a, b). The application depends on the size (1 to 100 nm) and shape (spherical, circular, hexagonal, etc.,) of the particle (Pattanayak et al. 2015). Particularly, the platinum, gold and silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are recognized noble metals significantly applied in magnetic, optoelectronics, electronics and information storage (Banerjee et al. 2014). Among the noble metals, AgNPs fetch a prominent place due to its unique properties such as good conductivity, chemical stability, catalytic and most importantly pharmacological aspects such as antibacterial, anti fungal, anti-viral, and anti-inflammatory activities (Velmurugan et al. 2015). However, the same material was utilized in various fields like soaps, detergents, cosmetics, toothpaste, shampoos, and pharmaceutical products too (Banerjee et al. 2014). Earlier reports described that the AgNPs are synthesized through various techniques like electrochemical, aerosol technologies, ultraviolet irradiation, photochemical methods, ultrasonic fields, and laser ablation techniques. However, they used hazardous chemicals and consumed high energy for low conversion materials (Narayanan and Sakthivel 2011; Pattanayak et al. 2015). At this juncture, there is an increase in the interest for synthesis of AgNPs through efficient, alternative, and eco-friendly way by green route. In recent years, AgNPs field of research is focusing on plant and its various part (leafs, fruits, seeds, latex, and peel) extracts particularly the leaf-mediated synthesis was immensely studied Alternanthera dentate (Nakkala et al. 2014), Abutilon indicum (Sadeghi and Gholamhoseinpoor 2015), Ziziphora tenuior (Ulug et al. 2015), Ficus carica (Geetha et al. 2014), Cymbopogan citrates (Masurkar et al. 2011), Acalypha indica (Krishnaraj et al. 2010), Premna herbacea (Kumar et al. 2013), Centella asiatica (Rout et al. 2013), Brassica rapa (Narayanan and Park 2014), Coccinia indica (Ashokkumar et al. 2013), Vitex negundo (Zargar et al. 2011), Melia dubia (Kathiravan et al. 2014), Portulaca oleracea (Firdhouse and Lalitha 2012), Pogostemon benghalensis (Gogoi 2013), Swietenia mahogany (Mondal et al. 2011), Moringa oleifera (Prasad and Elumalai 2011), Garcinia mangostana (Veerasamy et al. 2011), Eclipta prostrate (Rajakumar and Rahuman 2011), Helianthus tuberosus (Aravinthan et al. 2015), Solanum nigrum and Solanum indicum (Sengottaiyan et al. 2016a, b) and Nelumbo nucifera (Santhoshkumar et al. 2011). However, there is not much study on the leaf biomass-mediated synthesis of AgNPs.

In the present study, AgNPs was synthesized from sugarcane leaf as a mode to utilize the waste sugarcane leaf for the synthesis of AgNPs which has been quite extensively burned in the agricultural field and small utilize as cattle feed (Miura et al. 2013; Lalitha et al. 2013; Chandel et al. 2012), antioxidant activity (Abbas et al. 2013), anti-mutation and nitric oxide-scavenging activities.


