
Abstract

Ascorbyl palmitate was synthesized using a Celite-immobilized commercial lipase (Lipolase 100L) in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) as an organic solvent system. Lipase immobilized by surface adsorption onto Celite 545 matrix and subsequently exposed to 1 % glutaraldehyde showed 75 % binding of protein. The Celite-bound lipase was optimally active at 75 °C and pH 8.5 under shaking and showed maximum hydrolytic activity toward p-NPP as a substrate. The bound lipase was found to be stimulated only in the presence of Al3+ and EDTA. All surfactants (Tween-20, Tween-80 and Triton X-100) had an inhibitory effect on lipase activity. The optimization of various reaction conditions of ascorbyl palmitate was achieved considering one factor at a time. The esterification of ascorbic acid and palmitic acid was carried out with 1 M ascorbic acid and 2.5 M palmitic acid in DMSO at 75 °C for 18 h under shaking (120 rpm). Molecular sieves had an important effect on the ester synthesis resulting in an enhanced yield. The by-product (H2O) produced in the reaction was scavenged by the molecular sieves (20 mg/ml) added in the reaction mixture which enhanced the ester yield to 80 %. The characterization of synthesized ester was done through FTIR spectroscopy.



Introduction

Lipases bring about a range of bioconversion reactions such as hydrolysis, inter-esterification, esterification, alcoholysis, acidolysis and aminolysis (Rajesh and Reddy 2013). Lipases find potential applications in bioprocesses largely due to their availability and stability in organic as well as in aqueous media (Sharma and Kanwar 2014). The use of lipase in immobilized form ensures that the enzyme remains stable in the organic medium, facilitating its subsequent recovery (Padilha et al. 2013). Lipase-catalyzed production of flavor esters by transesterification reactions is influenced by a number of transesterification variables, such as molarity of alcohol, reaction time, temperature and amount of immobilized enzyme (Garlapati and Banerjee 2013). There are many advantages of using enzyme in low water/organic solvent media such as better solubility of substrate and products, simple removal of solvent (most of the organic solvents have lower boiling point than water), reduction in water-dependent side reactions, easy removal of enzyme after reaction since it is not dissolved in organic solvents, better thermal stability of enzyme at high temperature, elimination of microbial contamination, absence of undesirable side reactions and an increased thermal stability of the enzyme in harsh conditions. The stability of biocatalyst in an organic solvent such as DMSO might be attributed to the fact that a thin layer of molecules remain tightly bound to the enzyme acting as a protective sheath along the enzyme hydrophilic surface, allowing retention of native confirmation. Also, the stimulation effect of the solvent on the enzyme modifies the oil–water interface to make enzymatic action easier without causing protein denaturation. Enhancement in enzymatic activity in the presence of organic solvents could be due to some alterations in the catalytic hydrophobic pocket of the enzyme (lipase) containing serine, aspartic acid and histidine groups. Lipases are the most sought enzymes from the viewpoint of solvent stability and possibly because of their esterification and transesterification reactions which are favored in the non-aqueous media.

Ascorbyl esters are emerging food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical additives, which can be prepared in an eco-friendly way by using lipases as catalysts. Because they are amphiphilic molecules, which possess high free radical scavenging capacity, they can be applied as liposoluble antioxidants as well as emulsifiers and biosurfactants (Stojanovic et al. 2015). l-Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is a natural antioxidant, but is highly polar and does not dissolve in fats and oil. The esterification process of converting ascorbic acid to its acid esters has been regarded as an effective solution for overcoming such problems. Furthermore, the esterified ascorbic acid products also have the antioxidant and surfactant functions with its potential application in high fat and food industries (Sun et al. 2013). The fatty acid and their esters obtained from oil and fats are used as acylating agent for the synthesis of hydrophobic vitamin C fatty acid ester (Karmee 2011). l-Ascorbyl palmitate is an amphipathic molecule that has both a hydrophilic (polar) head and a hydrophobic (a polar) tail and hence it is both lipohilic and water soluble (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Schematic steps for the formation of ascorbyl palmitate using immobilized lipase

Fig. 1

Schematic steps for the formation of ascorbyl palmitate using immobilized lipase

Ascorbyl palmitate is preferred over ascorbic acid as an ingredient in food due to its lipophilic nature (Coppen 1999). It also acts as an anticarcinogenic compound and can strongly inhibit the DNA synthesis in cancer cells (Kageyama et al. 1999). Ascorbyl palmitate is also used as an antioxidant and preservative in food, vitamins, drugs and cosmetics (Wawire et al. 2011). It is also used to control the oxidation of lipids such as PUFA (Jacobsen 2010). Ascorbyl palmitate also acts synergistically with vitamin E. In most prevalent manufacturing processes, ascorbic acid is esterified with sulfuric acid and the product of the reaction is esterified with palmitic acid (Pokorny et al. 2001).

Chemical synthesis has some drawbacks, such as the low or non-selectivity for the site of esterification, the requirement for protection and de-protection steps and product purification difficulties (Liang et al. 2012). However, vitamin C ester undergoes oxidation, degradation and rearrangement under the chemo-catalyzed reaction (Karmee 2011). Owing to a number of important applications of ascorbic acid or its derivatives, the aim of the present work was to synthesize ascorbyl palmitate in an organic medium using Celite-bound immobilized commercial lipase (Lipolase 100L).


