
Abstract

Solid-state fermentation (SSF) can divert food waste from landfills and produce high-value products. This study was aimed to investigate the feasibility of using SSF and optimize the conditions of production of phytase by Aspergillus ficuum from potato waste. Different parameters including pH of the potato waste, inoculum level, moisture content, incubation period, temperature, and supplementary nitrogen and carbon sources were evaluated. The results indicated that pH, inoculum level, and moisture content did not significantly vary phytase production. However, different incubation periods, incubation temperatures, nitrogen sources, and carbon sources changed the phytase production significantly. The ideal and economic conditions for phytase production consisted of a normal moisture content (79%) of potato waste, 1.0 ml inoculum size, and normal pH 6.1 at room temperature for 144 h incubation time. The highest phytase activity (5.17 ± 0.82 U/g ds) was obtained under the aforementioned optimized conditions. When (NH4)2SO4 was used as a nitrogen source in the substrate, the phytase activity increased to 12.93 ± 0.47 U/g ds, which was a 2.5-fold increase compared to the control treatment. This study proposed a novel and economical way to convert food processing waste to highly valuable products and investigated the optimal conditions of the production of phytase during SSF in potato waste.



Introduction

Phytic acid is ubiquitous in nature and is the principal storage form of phosphorus in cereals, legumes, oilseeds, and nuts (Vohra and Satyanarayana 2003). It is known as a food inhibitor which can chelate micronutrients. Also, it is not a bioavailable source of phosphate for monogastric animals, such as human, swine, dog and cat, due to the lack of enzyme phytase in their digestive tract (Haefner et al. 2005). Therefore, extra phosphate in other digestible form has to be added into the animal feed to meet the P requirement. This will not only increase the cost of feed, but also create environmental pollution due to the surplus of P in the animal waste (Yi et al. 1996). Phytase is the primary enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of phytic acid and releases inorganic phosphate, which improves the overall P digestibility by 25–30%, resulting from approximately 50% degradation of the cereal phytate (Jongbloed and Kemme 1990; Kemme et al. 1997). This will alleviate phosphorus demand in animal feed, as P resource is approaching depletion. Furthermore, phytase can be also applied as cosmetic additives and plant nutrition (Koshy et al. 2012; Gujar et al. 2013).

Nowadays, many types of enzymes are produced through the Aspergillus species (Coban et al. 2015; Kitcha and Cheirsilp 2014; Muñiz-Márquez et al. 2016; Bergstrom et al. 2016). A. ficuum, a filamentous fungus, is a microorganism used for phytase production (Bogar et al. 2003; Coban et al. 2015). The wide-scale industrial applications and the increasing global demand of phytase are not being met due to their high production costs. Therefore, it is necessary to produce phytase using inexpensive or renewable material as an alternative. The use of food waste from municipal solid waste (MSW) as substrate can reduce the phytase production cost by lowering the material cost.

Municipal solid waste, which is disposed in landfills, generates hazardous contaminated leachates and air emissions (EI-Fadel et al. 1997). The leachate has a significant adverse impact on public health, environment, public safety, and groundwater quality (Lu et al. 1985; Yang et al. 2008; Fatta et al. 1999; Abu-Rukah and Al-Kofahi 2001). The gaseous emission is a source of greenhouse gases (e.g., CO2 and CH4) and odors cause deterioration in the esthetic quality of the surrounding area (EI-Fadel et al. 1997). Therefore, it is important to reduce the amount of waste being sent to the landfill. Solid-state fermentation (SSF) offers a sustainable solution to divert food waste away from landfills. SSF is a fermentation process that utilizes solid substrates as support material and source of nutrients to grow microorganisms in the absence of free-flowing liquid (Pandey et al. 2000).

Food processing wastes, which are abundant in nature and rich in nutritional content, are suitable substrates for solid-state fermentation. Currently, food processing wastes such as potato waste and tofu residue are disposed by dumping in the landfill. The total production of potato worldwide was 368 million tons in 2013 as reported by the Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nation (FAO Statistic Yearbook 2013). Farming and food processing industries produced a huge amount of potato waste, which could be utilized as raw material for enzyme production. According to Mahmood et al., potato waste consists of 66.78% starch, 14.70% crude protein, 2.20% cellulose, and 3.39% pectin. The substrate used for SSF should be a nutritious material. Therefore, the high starch content makes potato waste a suitable substrate for SSF.

In solid state fermentation, the nutrient-rich organic waste can be converted to highly valuable products such as enzymes, proteins, flavors, and biologically active secondary metabolites (Raimbault 1998; Pandey et al. 2000; Pandey 2003). These products can generate substantial revenues. For example, in 2010, the technical enzymes generated $1.10 billion in revenues and the world market for industrial enzymes is expected to increase to $6 billion by 2016 (Anon 2012). The continuously growing bio-processing industry demands inexpensive and renewable material.

The end products in the SSF process are subject to the microorganism used in the fermentation process. Several studies have been carried out to investigate different microorganisms, e.g., fungi, bacteria and yeast, to produce the desirable products from various substrates. For instance, peanut press cake and rice bran produced lipases by using Aspergillus sp. and wheat bran produced xylanase by using Rhizopus sp. (Pandey et al. 2000; Behnam et al. 2016). For proper functioning of SSF processes, various operational parameters, such as moisture content and pH of substrate, and incubation temperature need to be considered, which have great impact on the effectiveness of the production rate and quality. Recently, studies on optimizing the operational parameters to increase the product yield were carried out (Kitcha and Cheirsilp 2014; Muñiz-Márquez et al. 2016; Bergstrom et al. 2016; Behnam et al. 2016). The optimal operational parameters depend on the characteristics of the microorganisms used in each process. In SSF, the moisture content has a major impact on the cell growth and enzyme production. Bogar et al. reported different phytase yields when moisture content was varied. In addition, Pal and Khanum also investigated the impact of pH on the productivity of enzymes and reported an optimum pH range (4.5–8) for enzyme production. The microbial growth is also dependent on temperature. Therefore, the use of suitable temperature is an important growth factor (Ellaiah et al. 2002).

Phytase was produced by Penicillium purpurogenum GE1 using corncob and corn bran under solid-state fermentation (Awad et al. 2014). Suresh and Radha showed that rice bran can produce phytase from Rhizopus oligosporus by solid-state fermentation. Besides, groundnut oil cake was used as substrate for phytase production by Buddhiwant et al.. However, most of the previous studies on SSF were conducted on agro-industrial wastes and no research has been reported using waste from food processing as a substrate for phytase production. In this study, a new substrate, potato waste, was used to produce phytase by A. ficuum under SSF for the first time.

The objectives of this study were: (a) to investigate the feasibility of using the food waste fraction from food processing waste using solid-state fermentation to produce high value-added products such as phytase and (b) to optimize the conditions of phytase production using potato waste.


