
Abstract

Emergence of resistant microbes to conventional antibiotics and increased emphasis on health-care costs has raised the concern for the development of new effective antimicrobial reagents. Silver nanoparticles being an excellent broad-spectrum antibacterial agent could be considered as a suitable alternative for existing antibiotic. This study demonstrates the extra-cellular synthesis of stable silver nanoparticles using supernatant of Lysinibacillus varians. The synthesized silver nanoparticles were characterized by using UV–visible spectrum analysis, X-ray diffraction, Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and FT-IR analysis. The synthesized silver nanoparticles showed a peak around 420 nm. TEM analysis revealed that the size of silver nanoparticles was in the range of 10–20 nm. Silver nanoparticles carry a charge of −39.86 mV, which confirmed the stability of silver nanoparticles. The biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles showed antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive, Gram-negative bacteria and fungi. Therefore, the current study reveals an efficient and eco-friendly synthesis of silver nanoparticles by L. varians with potent antimicrobial activity.



Introduction

Nanotechnology is an interdisciplinary field which impacts significantly all aspects of human’s life (Mohanpuria et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2011). This field deals with the synthesis and applications of nanomaterials in various areas (Duran et al. 2005). Metal nanoparticles exhibit unique properties, which depend on their size, shape, composition, and dielectric surroundings (Hubenthal et al. 2005; Chen and Goodman 2004; Jain et al. 2006). Ag-NPs have numerous applications in the field of diagnostics, textile, catalysis, optics, photography, electronics and food industry (Rai et al. 2009). Silver nanoparticles have been used as antimicrobial agents in surgically implanted catheters, surgical bandages, eye treatment, dental hygiene, bone substitute biomaterials, disinfecting medical devices/home appliances and textile coatings (Bosetti et al. 2002; Cho et al. 2005; Gupta and Silver 1998; Jain and Pradeep 2005; Li et al. 2008). Microbial synthesis of metal nanoparticles can take place either intracellularly or extracellularly (Ahmad et al. 2007; Jain et al. 2011; Kalishwaralal et al. 2010; Pugazhenthiran et al. 2009; Saifuddin et al. 2009). Intracellular synthesis of nanoparticles requires additional steps to release the synthesized nanoparticles (Kalimuthu et al. 2008). At the same time extracellular biosynthesis is cheap and requires simpler downstream processing. This paper reports the extracellular biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles with their potent antimicrobial activity.



Discussion

The bacterial mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles is an attractive and alternative to chemically and physically produced AgNPs due to their green properties. The biological methods of nanoparticle synthesis are economical, easy to perform and environment friendly. Silver nanoparticle had drawn attention because of their extensive application to new technologies in chemistry, electronics, medicine and biotechnology. In the present study, the selected bacterial strain DNP 10 identified as L. varians showed ability to synthesize silver nanoparticles by extracellular mechanisms. The screening of microbial isolate for silver nanoparticle synthesis is generally carried out on the basis of colour change (Kalimuthu et al. 2008). Appearance of a dark-brown colour in the solution is a primary indication for AgNPs formation in the reaction mixture (Sastry et al. 2003). The excitation of surface plasmon vibration in silver nanoparticles was considered as the basis for formation of brown colour. Similar observation was previously reported in various studies, where a pale yellow to brown colour was formed due to the reduction of aqueous silver ions to silver nanoparticles (Saravanan et al. 2011). Silver nanoparticles synthesis has also been reported by using Lysinibacillus sphaericus MR-1 (Gou et al. 2015) and Lysinibacillus fusiformis (Yousef 2014). The extracellular synthesis of silver nanoparticles by using culture supernatant of various bacteria B. licheniformis (Kalishwaralal et al. 2008), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Jeevan et al. 2012), Lactobacillus sp. (Ranganath et al. 2012), Exiguobacterium sp. KNU1 (Dhawal and Dae 2013) and probiotic bacteria B. Linens (Ranganathan and Ramachandran 2012) has already been reported. This supports that colour change can be considered as an indication of silver nanoparticles formation. The synthesis process adopted in this study was much faster than previously reported bioreduction processes, which requires hours or days (Vivekanandhan et al. 2014; Song et al. 2009). Synthesis of silver nanoparticles was further confirmed by UV–Vis spectroscopy, which measures the absorption spectra of silver nanoparticles formed due to collective excitation of conduction electrons in the metal. Thus, methods based on UV–Vis spectroscopy have been shown to be an effective technique for the analysis of nanoparticles (Sastry et al. 1998). This is already reported that spherical silver nanoparticles exhibit maximum absorbance between 420 and 450 nm (Ninganagouda et al. 2013; Sunkar and Nachiyar 2012). The size, shape, morphology, composition and dielectric environment of prepared nanoparticles affect the width of SPR bands (Kelly et al. 2003).

The XRD spectrum of synthesized nanoparticles was in agreement with diffraction standard JCPDS 04-0783, which confirms the presence of elemental silver. The XRD peaks at 2θ of 38.07, 46.24, 54.82 and 77.110 could be attributed to 111, 200, 220 and 311 crystallographic planes of face-centered cubic silver crystals, respectively. Thus, XRD pattern clearly confirms the crystalline nature of Ag-NPs synthesized in this study. As per XRD analysis in the absence of PVP, silver oxide nanoparticles were formed instead of silver nanoparticles. The PVP was added to stabilize the formation of silver nanoparticles. So, it can be inferred that the extracellular protein present in culture supernatant were responsible for the reduction of silver nitrate and PVP played a major role in the stabilization of formed silver nanoparticles.

TEM analysis of purified silver nanoparticles confirmed that nanoparticles were spherical and also not aggregated. Protein secreted by microorganisms may be responsible for the stability of silver nanoparticles. The size of silver nanoparticles produced by L. varians (10–20 nm) fall closer to the size of silver nanoparticles produced by other bacteria (Gurunathan et al. 2009). The silver nanoparticles produced extracellularly by using probiotic bacteria Lactobacillus sp. were also in size range of 2–20 nm (Ranganath et al. 2012). The size of nanoparticles can have direct effect on its physico-chemical properties and this can vary among the particles formed by different groups of microorganisms.

The peaks observed at wave number 1651 cm−1 indicated the stretching of C = O amide I bands of peptide linkage and 1288 cm−1 indicated stretching of CN amines and NH bending of peptide. The peak at 1057 cm−1 was due to stretching of C–OH in primary alcohols. This is reported that the carbonyl group (C = O) of amino acid residues and peptides has the ability to bind silver ion (Balaji et al. 2009). The FTIR spectrum indicated that proteins were responsible for stabilizing the silver nanoparticles. DLS measures the hydrodynamic size of silver nanoparticles. The size measured by DLS is not only the size of metallic nanoparticles but it also includes the stabilizers absorbed on the surface of nanoparticles. Thus the size measured by DLS is larger than measured by other techniques. The particles carry a charge of −44.55 mV. This confirms that the biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles are stable. A minimum of ±30 mV is an indication of stability of silver nanoparticles (Jacobs and Muller 2002). The polydispersity index (PdI) of silver nanoparticles was below 0.3.

The antimicrobial activity of silver nanoparticles has been reported against fungus, yeast, microbial biofilms yeast, Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria (Kim et al. 2007; Sondi and Salopek-Sondi 2004; Abdeen et al. 2014; Gaidhani et al. 2013; Singh et al. 2013). Antimicrobial activity of silver nanoparticles has been reported against both Gram-positive as well as Gram-negative bacteria (Sondi and Salopek-Sondi 2004). The antimicrobial activity of synthesized nanoparticles was reported against P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus niger (Govindaraju et al. 2010; Mirzajani et al. 2011). AgNPs synthesized by isolated bacterial strain DNP 10 (L. varians) showed excellent antibacterial activity against all tested strains (bacterial and fingal). In this study, MIC of PVP coated silver nanoparticles against E. coli, S. aureus, B. subtilis, P. aeruginosa was evaluated as 46 μg/mL.MIC of silver nanoparticles against C. albicans was evaluated as 23 μg/mL. Various studies have reported different values of MIC for different pathogens. Shrivastava et al. determined the average MIC value of AgNPs against E. coli as 25 and 100 μg/mL MIC value against S. aureus. However, Dos Santos et al. reported MIC value as 100 μg/mL for both E. coli and S. aureus. MIC of silver nanoparticles against P. aeruginosa has been reported as 75 μg/mL (Morones et al. 2005) and 20 μg/mL (Palanisamy et al. 2014) in two different studies. MIC of silver nanoparticles against B. subtilis is reported as 40 μg/mL (Ruparelia et al. 2008). Different MIC values for same pathogens may be due to difference in strains of pathogens, source of pathogens and different size and shape of nanoparticles. Stabilization method employed for synthesized nanoparticles also influenced the efficiency of silver nanoparticles. MIC of citrate capped silver nanoparticles has been reported as 5–10 μg/mL against E. coli (Zhou et al. 2012). Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) showed good antibacterial activity towards S. aureus, E. coli, P. aeruginosa, Bacillus subtilis and good fungicidal activity against various yeasts and molds (Bryaskova et al. 2011). The antimicrobial activity of AgNPs is inversely related to size and shape (Pal et al. 2007). The high specific surface-to-volume ratio of silver nanoparticles increases their contact with microorganisms, promoting the dissolution of silver ions, thereby improving biocidal effectiveness. The ability of silver nanoparticles to release silver ions is a key to their bactericidal activity (Stobie et al. 2008).
