
Abstract

This study was aimed to investigate the diversity and function of bacterial population associated with Gigaspora margarita spores. The fungus was propagated in sterilized sand/soil pots using alfalfa (Medicago sativa), grain sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), or maize (Zea mays) as host plants, or in sterilized vermiculite pots using alfalfa as host plants, respectively. Bacteria were isolated from the new-formed spores using diluted plate method, and typical bacterial isolates were identified according to 16S rRNA gene phylogenetic analysis. Total 43 bacterial isolates affiliated to three phyla and 23 genera were obtained. The spore-associated bacterial communities were obviously different among the four source spores, suggesting that plant species or substrates could influence the bacterial population. Bacillus and Streptomyces were most frequently associated with the fungal spores. Function analysis of these bacteria by plate tests, it was found that about 30.2% isolates stimulated the spore germination, five out of seven tested isolates improved the hyphal growth, total 57.5% of the tested isolates solubilized phosphorus at different levels, 15% isolates degraded chitin, and a few isolates suppressed the growth of Escherichia coli or Staphylococcus aureus. In pot experiment, three bacterial isolates (belonging to Curtobacterium, Ensifer, or Bacillus, respectively) displayed improvement effect on alfalfa growth and/or the colonization of roots by G. margarita.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-017-0612-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are important symbiotic partner of most terrestrial plant species. Soil bacteria selectively associated with AMF could possibly serve as the third partner of the mycorrhizal symbiosis (Levy et al. 2009; Lecomte et al. 2011; Bidondo et al. 2016). Several of these bacteria displayed beneficial effects on the performance of AMF, including the promotion of fungal spore germination, hyphal growth, the colonization of roots, and the protein expression and lipid profile (Garbaye 1994; Hildebrandt et al. 2002; Salvioli et al. 2010). Information about AMF-associated bacterial communities and their possible functions is necessary for understanding the ecological roles of the bacteria and revealing mycorrhizal ecosystem. The spore-associated bacteria (SAB) of Gigaspora margarita MAFF 520054 were analyzed with PCR-DGGE method, and indicated that host plants or substrates could influence the bacterial composition (Long et al. 2008). In this study, the bacterial populations associated with the fungal spores were investigated by cultured method and potential functions of these bacteria were analyzed.


