
Abstract

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are highly recalcitrant compounds due to their high hydrophobicity and tendency to partition in organic phase of soils. Pyrene is a high-molecular weight PAH, which has human health concerns. In the present study, a bacterial consortium, PBR, was developed from a long-term polluted site, viz., Amlakhadi, Ankleshwar, Gujarat, for effective degradation of pyrene. The consortium effectively metabolized pyrene as a sole source of carbon and energy. The consortium comprised three bacterial species, Pseudomonas sp. ASDP1, Burkholderia sp. ASDP2, and Rhodococcus sp. ASDP3. The maximum growth rate of consortium was 0.060/h and the maximum pyrene degradation rate was 16 mg/l/day. The organic and inorganic nutrients along with different surfactants did not affect pyrene degradation, but degradation rate moderately increased in the presence of sodium succinate. The significant characteristic of the consortium was that it possessed an ability to degrade six other hydrocarbons, both independently and simultaneously at 37 °C, in BHM (pH 7.0) under shaking conditions (150 rpm) and it showed resistance towards mercury at 10 mM concentration. Phthalic acid as one of the intermediates during pyrene degradation was detected through high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The efficiency of consortium for pyrene degradation was validated in simulated microcosms’ study, which indicated that 99% of pyrene was metabolized by the consortium under ambient conditions.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-017-0598-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous compounds present in the environment. Their origin in the environment may be attributed to extensive anthropogenic activities like industrialization, incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and oil spills or natural phenomena like wood fires, volcano eruptions and natural underwater oil spills (Juhasz and Naidu 2000; Atlas and Hazen 2011). PAHs are considered as priority pollutants by the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). They persist in the environment for a long time because of the sequestration in sediment particles’ micropores and thus remain out of reach of microbial degradation. They are also concerned with human health because many PAHs are mutagenic, carcinogenic and teratogenic (Haritash and Kaushik 2009; Kumar et al. 2011).

Pyrene is high-molecular weight (HMW) PAH having very high hydrophobicity and because of its high octanol:water partition coefficient, there are relatively less reports of efficient degradation of this compound by microorganisms, though many efforts have been made by several investigators. In addition, few studies have reported on the utilization of these compounds as a sole carbon source (Bacosa and Inoue 2015; Ghosh et al. 2014; Ho et al. 2000; Wang et al. 2008). There are reports of degradation of pyrene by pure cultures and consortia developed from various origins like petroleum sludge, oil spill sites or other petroleum products contaminated sites. The isolated organisms may be from the Actinomycetes phylum (Mycobacterium sp.) or Proteobacteria (Pseudomonas sp., Burkholderia sp., etc.). But these are not very efficient degraders of HMW PAHs like pyrene. Bacosa et al. developed six consortia from sediment mainly consisting of different species of Pseudomonas and Burkholderia capable of degrading various PAHs. Availability of extra carbon or nitrogen sources may be limiting factor or the presence of toxic compounds may retard the degradation. So it is very useful to develop a versatile consortium that can degrade pyrene in the presence of other pollutants with their simultaneous degradation, since Amlakhadi canal received mixed pollutants from different surrounding industries (Patel et al. 2012a; Kathuria 2007).

The present study is focused on the development of efficient microbial consortium from the long-term polluted soil sediments of the Amlakhadi canal, Ankleshwar, which is the tributary of the Narmada River and polluted by extensive discharge of effluents from industries of the Ankleshwar Industrial Estate. Optimization of physicochemical parameters, effects of other additives and surfactants and effect of other hydrocarbons and heavy metals were other significant objectives. The most important objective of the study is a simultaneous degradation of mixture of PAHs (fluoranthene, pyrene, naphthalene, chrysene and phenanthrene) and related hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene and xylene) by developed consortium in simulated microcosms. Thus, study provides an important pace for the further bioremediation process like macrocosm study or reactor scale study.


