


Introduction

Relentless production, utilization and dumping of synthetic organic chemicals has contributed to environmental pollution globally (David and Kartheek 2015; Malaja et al. 2014). Synthetic dyes are one such class of chemicals that are broadly used in wide range of industries including textile, paper, printing, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals (Vinodhkumar et al. 2013). There are many structural varieties of dyes with respect to the type of chromophore, viz azo, anthraquinone, acridine, arylmethane, cyanine, phthalocyanine, nitro, nitroso, quinone-imine, thiazole or xanthene dyes. It is estimated that 10–15 % of the dyes are lost in the effluent during dyeing process (Houria and Oualid 2009). Many synthetic dyes are difficult to decolorize due to their complex structure. Decolorization of textile dye effluent does not occur when treated aerobically by municipal sewage systems (Willmott et al. 1998). Brightly colored, water-soluble, reactive and acid dyes are the most problematic, as they tend to pass through conventional treatment systems unaffected (Willmott et al. 1998). Color can be removed from effluent by chemical and physical methods including adsorption, coagulation–flocculation, ion exchange, oxidation and electrochemical methods (Lin and Peng 1994, 1996). However, the previously mentioned ways for clean-up prove to be quite expensive, limiting their application at large-scale performances (Moreira et al. 2000). Dye decolorization is also achieved by routine anaerobic treatment of the effluents; nevertheless, reduction of azo dyes (up to 50 % of the total amount of dyes used in the textile industry) by the bacterial reductases produces uncolored, highly toxic aromatic amines.

Laccases (benzenediol:oxygen oxidoreductases, EC 1.10.3.2) are blue multicopper oxidases that catalyze the oxidation of an array of aromatic substrates concomitantly with the reduction of molecular oxygen to water (Giardina et al. 2010; Shujing et al. 2013). Fungal laccases have many advantages, such as substrate non-specific, directly oxidizing various phenolic compounds, using molecular oxygen as the final electron acceptor instead of hydrogen peroxide, showing a considerable level of stability in the extracellular environment. Therefore, fungal laccases have been widely applied in biotechnology and industry, such as delignification of lignocellulosics, paper pulping/bleaching, and degradation of different recalcitrant compounds, bioremediation, sewage treatment, dye decolorization and biosensors (Shujing et al. 2013; Osma et al. 2010; Shervedani and Amini 2012).

Therefore, in the present study, a laccase from novel white-rot fungus, identified as Marasmius sp. BBKAV79 was subjected to purification, and purified laccase was applied for decolorization of the textile dyes.


