
Abstract

In this study, a cDNA library was constructed from the total RNA of sweet potato leaves. A total of 789 copies of the cDNA were cloned in Escherichia coli by employing the pGEM-T Easy vector. Sequencing was carried out by Solgent Co. (Korea). As many as 579 expressed sequence tag–simple sequence repeat (EST-SSR) markers were designed (73.38%) from the known cDNA nucleotide base sequences. The lengths of the developed EST-SSR markers ranged from 100 to 499 bp (average length 238 bp). Their motif sequence types were varied, with most being dinucleotides and pentanucleotides, and the most commonly found motifs were CAGAAT (29.0%) and TCT (2.8%). Based on these SSR-containing sequences, 619 pairs of high-quality SSR primers were designed using WebSat and Primer3web. The total number of primers designed was 144. Polymorphism was evident in 82 EST-SSR markers among 20 Korean sweet potato cultivars tested and in 90 EST-SSR markers in the two parents of a mapping population, Yeseumi and Annobeny. In this study, the hexaploid sweet potato (2n = 6x = 90) EST-SSR markers were developed in the absence of full-sequence data. Moreover, by acting as a molecular tag for particular traits, the EST-SSR marker can also simultaneously identify information about the corresponding gene. These EST-SSR markers will allow the molecular analysis of sweet potato to be done more efficiently. Thus, we can develop high-quality sweet potato while overcoming the challenges from climate change and other unfavorable conditions.



Introduction

Sweet potato [Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.] is a hexaploid (2n = 6x = 90) plant that belongs to the family Convolvulaceae (Ting and Kehr 1953; Martin 1970). The tuberous root of sweet potato, which is involved in carbohydrate storage and vegetative propagation, is a unique organ that has value in biological research of organogenesis and evolution as well as importance in agriculture. In the future, more variations of sweet potato will be needed for its breeding, because despite its importance, this hexaploid crop is difficult to breed owing to the complexity of its genetics and the lack of genomic resources (Kriegner et al. 2003; Cervantes-Flores et al. 2008). Traditionally, phenotypic markers have been used to provide descriptors for identifying sweet potato cultivars (Huamán and Zhang 1997), but they are unreliable owing to their paucity and vulnerability to environmental influence. Molecular markers have great potential to speed up the process of developing improved cultivars; however, a little effort has been devoted to the development and application of molecular marker technology for the genetic improvement of sweet potato (Kriegner et al. 2003). Genetic markers offer a number of applications for sweet potato genetic improvement. The randomly amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) technique developed in 1990 is a powerful molecular marker technique in genetics and plant breeding (Welsh and McClelland 1990; Williams et al. 1990). RAPD markers have been used on sweet potato to study genetic segregation and linkage (Thompson et al. 1997), construct DNA fingerprints (Connolly et al. 1994), and identify a gene for root-knot nematode resistance (Ukoskit et al. 1997). The amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) technique developed in 1995 (Vos et al. 1995) is based on the selective PCR amplification of small restriction fragments (80–400 bp) from a total digest of genomic DNA. In sweet potato, AFLP markers have been used to study genetic linkage maps (Kriegner et al. 2003; Cervantes-Flores et al. 2008) and to assess genetic diversity (Zhang et al. 2000). Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) can be used as a cost-effective and valuable source for the development of molecular markers, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and simple sequence repeats (SSRs). DNA SSRs are widely distributed in both noncoding and transcribed sequences, and are commonly known as genomic-SSRs and EST-SSRs (Morgante et al. 2002). SSRs are useful for many applications in plant genetics and breeding, such as for high-density linkage map construction, genetic diversity analysis, cultivar identification, and marker-assisted selection. However, it is still expensive, labor intensive, and time-consuming to develop genomic SSR markers. In contrast, EST-SSRs can be rapidly developed from an EST database at lower cost. Moreover, EST-SSRs can also lead to direct gene tagging for quantitative trait locus mapping of agronomically important traits and increase the efficiency of marker-assisted selection (Gupta and Rustgi 2004). In addition, EST-SSRs show a higher level of transferability to closely related species than do genomic SSR markers (Scott et al. 2000; Eujayl et al. 2004; Zhang et al. 2005; Saha et al. 2006) and can serve as anchor markers for comparative mapping and evolutionary studies (Varshney et al. 2005a, b). Breeding practices for improving the quality of sweet potato is ongoing worldwide, and the recent molecular markers developed for sweet potato have demonstrated good potential to be used in genetic selection (Wang et al. 2010).


