
Abstract

Dieback and wilting symptoms caused by complex soilborne fungi are nowadays the most serious threatening disease affecting olive trees (Olea europaea) in Tunisia and presumably in many Mediterranean basin countries. Fusarium is one of the important phytopathogenic genera associated with dieback symptoms of olive trees. The objective of the present study was to confirm the pathogenicity of Fusarium spp. isolated from several olive-growing areas in Tunisia. According to the pathogenic test done on young olive trees (cv. Chemlali), 23 out of 104 isolates of Fusarium spp. were found to be pathogenic and the others were weakly or not pathogenic. The pathogenic Fusarium spp. isolates were characterized using molecular methods based on ITS PCR. Isolation results revealed the predominance of Fusarium solani (56.5%) and F. oxysporum species (21.7%) compared to F. chalmydosporum (8.7%), F. brachygibbosum (8.7%) and F. acuminatum (4.34%). Based on pathogenicity test, disease severity was highly variable among the 23 pathogenic isolates tested (P < 0.05) where F. solani was the most aggressive dieback agent. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that shows that Fusarium spp. might be a major agent causing dieback disease of olive trees in Tunisia.



Introduction

Olive tree (Olea europaea) is the most widely cultivated tree species in Tunisia. With a total cultivated area of about 1.7 million ha and more than 70 million olive trees (anonymous), Tunisia is ranked as the fourth producer of olive oil worldwide. However, many insect pests and plant pathogens constantly threaten olive cultivation. The dieback and wilting symptoms induced by complex soilborne fungi has caused considerable economic losses in olive orchards in Tunisia (Boulila and Mahjoub 1994; Triki et al. 2006, 2009, 2011; Gharbi et al. 2014, 2015). Among these fungi, Fusarium species may cause disease in olive trees. Diagnosis of dieback and decline of young olive trees revealed the presence of a broad range of fungi isolated from the affected plant tissues (Triki et al. 2009). Some species are known as common pathogens on olive trees, such as Verticillium dahliae (V. dahliae), but also an increased frequency of isolates belonging to the genus Fusarium was noted. These observations together with the increase of inquiries received by the Olive Tree Institute of Tunisia, led us to investigate the etiology of this disease, to perform pathogenicity tests of the different Fusarium species recovered from olive orchards and their identification based on morphological and molecular features. Disease incidence has increased over years and seems to be linked to changes in farming systems and the subsequencalculated using the following formulat decline in soil fertility. Regarding olive production, some fluctuations have been recorded which were probably linked to climatic conditions and to the presence of some fungi especially in soils previously cultivated with some susceptible vegetable crops (potato, tomato, pepper, eggplant, etc.). Consequently, with the establishment of new plantations, incidence of wilting, dieback and death of young trees has also increased (Triki et al. 2006, 2009, 2011). Disease impact was serious in nurseries and orchards during the first years after establishment, especially during spring and summer, causing important damage to new plantations. However, root rot of young olive trees was reported to be an emerging problem in nurseries and some important olive grove areas worldwide (Al-Ahmed and Hamidi 1984; Boulila et al. 1992; Sanchez-Hernandez et al. 1998; Lucero et al. 2006). Fusarium species have been recorded from several parts of the world and they are known to be pathogenic to many plants (Boughalleb et al. 2005; Mehl and Epstein 2007). In Tunisia, Ayed demonstrated the pathogenicity of Fusarium spp. on potato plants. Despite the importance of the olive-growing sector in Tunisia, this area is threatened by different species of soilborne pathogenic fungi, such as Fusarium. All these observations have raised the attention of researcher about the possible involvement of new pathogenic forms that may have evolved from other species infecting Solanaceous crops. Such question could be answered by investigating the prevalence and pathogenicity of each isolated fungal species. This will provide useful information towards a better understanding of the current phytosanitary status of olive trees, thus contributing to the design of better disease management programs in these infected areas. Therefore, the present study aims to characterize morphologically and molecularly by polymerase chain reaction-internal transcribed spacer (ITS) Fusarium spp. isolates recovered from infected olives plants; assess their pathogenicity and report the role of some abiotic factors in the increase of root rot disease.


