
Abstract

The aim of the present study was to assess the bioremediation potential of endophytic bacteria isolated from roots of Tridax procumbens plant. Five bacterial endophytes were isolated and subsequently tested for minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) against different heavy metals. Amongst the five isolates, strain RM exhibited the highest resistance to copper (750 mg/l), followed by zinc (500 mg/l), lead (450 mg/l), and arsenic (400 mg/l). Phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rDNA sequence suggested that strain RM was a member of genus Paneibacillus. Strain RM also had the capacity to produce secondary metabolites, indole acetic acid, siderophores, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase, and biosurfactant and solubilize phosphate. The growth kinetics of strain RM was altered slightly in the presence of metal stress. Temperature and pH influenced the metal removal rate. The results suggest that strain RM can survive under the high concentration of heavy metals and has been identified as a potential candidate for application in bioremediation of heavy metals in contaminated environments.



Introduction

Heavy metal contamination of soil and water has become a serious problem worldwide. Bioconcentration and subsequent biomagnification of heavy metals and high levels of toxicity they impart to biological organisms indicate the necessity for the removal of heavy metals from contaminated soil and water (Govarthanan et al. 2014). Several physical, chemical, and biological methods have been proposed for the removal of heavy metals from contaminated soil and water (Shi et al. 2009), of which bacteria-based bioremediation is considered as a promising and viable method. Bacteria-based bioremediation is less expensive and eco-friendly (Govarthanan et al. 2015a), but is highly influenced by several factors, such as survival of bacteria in contaminated soil or water, influence of abiotic factors on the growth of bacteria, mechanism of metal detoxification, expression rate of metal detoxificiation genes, and influence of pollutants on bacterial activity (Suja et al. 2014; Govarthanan et al. 2015b; Praburaman et al. 2015).

In the past few years, attention has been concentrated on the bioremediation of heavy metals using endophytic plant-growth-promoting bacteria (Sun et al. 2010; Ma et al. 2015). Endophytes or endophytic bacteria colonise internal tissues of normal healthy plants with little negative effects on the host (Schulz and Boyle 2006). The endophytic bacterial strains are ubiquitously distributed in a wide range of plant species, and have been found in plant organs, such as leaves, stem, root, flowers, and fruits (Compant et al. 2011; Sun et al. 2010). These bacteria play a significant role in plant growth and development by producing plant-growth-promoting substances, such as indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), siderophores, and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) deaminase (Tiwari et al. 2016). They also produce biosurfactants and extracellular polymeric substances that prevent, moderate, or nullify the toxicity of heavy metals in these plants (Rajkumar et al. 2009; Weyens et al. 2010). Zhu et al. reported that endophytic bacteria isolated from hyperaccumulator plants Pteris vittata and Pteris multifida showed significant metal removal and plant-growth-promoting properties.

Tridax procumbens is a widespread weed with massive root system and rapid growth rate, and is commonly seen throughout the year (Khandare et al. 2011). Kumar et al. reported that T. procumbens effectively removed Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Cd from soil contaminated with industrial wastes. However, the endophytic bacterial population in the roots of T. procumbens roots and their heavy metal bioremediation potential has not been reported. Hence, the aim of the present study was to isolate metal-resistant endophytic bacteria from roots of T. procumbens, to evaluate multi-metal tolerance and plant-growth-promoting characteristics of the isolates, to assess bioremediation potential of the isolate, and to optimise experimental variables, such as pH and temperature for enhanced bioremediation.


