
Abstract

An extracellular alkaline protease producing B. amyloliquefaciens SP1 was isolated from apple rhizosphere having multifarious plant growth-promoting activities. B. amyloliquefaciens SP1 protease was immobilized using various concentrations of calcium alginate, agar and polyacrylamide to determine the optimum concentration for formation of the beads. Enzyme activity before immobilization (at 60 °C, pH 8.0 for 5 min) was 3580 µg/ml/min. The results of immobilization with various matrices revealed that 3 % calcium alginate (2829.92 µg/ml/min), 2 % agar (2600 µg/ml/min) and 10 % polyacrylamide (5698.99 µg/ml/min) were optimum concentrations for stable bead formation. Immobilized enzyme reusability results indicated that calcium alginate, agar and polyacrylamide beads retained 25.63, 22.05 and 34.04 % activity in their fifth repeated cycle, respectively. In cell immobilization technique, the free movement of microorganisms is restricted in the process, and a semi-continuous system of fermentation can be used. In the present work, this technique has been used for alkaline protease production using different matrices. Polyacrylamide (10 %) was found with the highest total alkaline protease titer, i.e., 24,847 µg/ml/min semi-continuously for 18 days as compared to agar (total enzyme titer: 5800 in 10 days) and calcium alginate (total enzyme titer: 13,010 in 15 days). This present study reported that polyacrylamide (10 %) among different matrices has maximum potential of immobilization of B. amyloliquefaciens SP1 and its detergent stable alkaline protease with effective application in bloodstain removal.



Introduction

Proteases (EC 3.4) are one of the largest and most diverse families of enzymes known till date. These hydrolyze proteins into short peptides or free amino acids. Proteases do not refer to a single enzyme, but a mixture of enzymes including proteinases and amidases (Qureshi et al. 2011). These enzymes have versatile applications in various industries, such as detergents, food, pharmaceutical, leather, silk, silver recovery and production of protein hydrolysates (Annamalai et al. 2013). Proteases are also envisaged as having extensive applications in the development of eco-friendly technologies as well as in several bioremediation processes (Jisha et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2009). Microbial proteases constitute one of the most important groups of industrial enzymes and their dominance in the industrial market is expected to increase further in coming years. Among different types (acidic, neutral and alkaline) of proteases, alkaline proteases are the most commonly used industrial enzyme in view of their activity and stability at high pH (Denizci et al. 2004; Devi et al. 2008).

Microbial proteases are usually produced by either free or immobilized cells. Immobilized whole cell/enzyme production offers several advantages such as better operational stability due to biocatalyst and high efficiency of catalysis. Immobilization of an enzyme allows for easy separation of the enzyme from the products and for recycling of the enzyme (Demirkan et al. 2011). Immobilized cells are used in food technology, biotechnology, biomedicine and analytical chemistry (Kumar and Vats 2010). It offers various advantages, such as increase of productivity due to the high cell concentration within the reactor, prevention of washout in continuous operation among others (Sankaralingam et al. 2012) and the ability to separate cell mass from the bulk liquid for possible reuse (Kumar and Vats 2010). However, proper selection of immobilization techniques and supporting materials is needed to minimize the disadvantages of immobilization. Generally, enzymes or cells are immobilized by physical adsorption, ionic binding, covalent binding, cross-linking and entrapment methods. Entrapment method has been considered most suitable among the various reported methods. It consists of enclosing the enzyme or cell in an aqueous solution inside a semi-permeable membrane capsule. It is possible to immobilize several enzymes or cells at the same time (Demirkan et al. 2011). Thus in the present study, the potential of various matrices for immobilization of alkaline protease and B. amyloliquefaciens SP1 was investigated.



Discussion

Use of enzymes as catalysts for large-scale industrial processes is limited by their high cost of production and stabilization on storage. During use, their stability decreases due to changes in pH, temperature, conformational changes as a result of friction, osmotic pressure imposed by the environs on their use, and a cumulative effect of all these factors as a function of duration of their use. Secondly, since they are soluble, their recovery from a mixture of substrate and product for reuse is not economically practical, rendering the costly enzymatic process even more costly (Kotwal and Shankar 2009). Among different techniques, entrapment in agar and calcium alginate gel offers many advantages due to its simplicity and nontoxic character (Gangadharan et al. 2009).

The prerequisites of immobilization of enzyme are proper permeability and rigidity of beads. For this concentration of agar, sodium alginate and polyacrylamide need to be optimized. Data appended in Tables 1, 2 and 3 reveal that the maximum entrapped protease activity was obtained with 2 % agar, 3 % sodium alginate and 10 % polyacrylamide beads. This indicates that alkaline protease activity was minimum when the concentrations of different matrices were low. This may be due to the high permeability of different matrices at low concentration. However, the protease activity decrease at higher concentration of agar (3 %) and polyacrylamide (12 %) was due to decreased gel porosity with increase in gel concentration and, consequently, resulted in diffusion limitation (Ahmed et al. 2010). Similar results were observed previously for other entrapped enzymes (Lamas et al. 2001; Samia and Ahmed 2010).

The reusability of the immobilized enzyme is very important from the point of view of reducing the cost of the enzyme. This is an important factor while considering its suitability for commercial applications (Tanksale et al. 2001). The results of the present work revealed that after five reuses, 25.63, 22.05 and 34.04 % activity was obtained as compared to their first use with calcium alginate-, agar- and polyacrylamide-entrapped enzymes, respectively. This may be due to the leakage of enzyme from the beads during their use and washing at the end of each cycle (Geethanjali and Subash 2013). Anwar et al. reported entrapment of protease in calcium alginate beads and decrease in protease activity after three reuses. Another study stated that α-amylase entrapped in calcium alginate beads could be reused for six cycles with about 30 % loss in activity (Kumar et al. 2006). Thus, polyacrylamide-entrapped alkaline protease of B. amyloliquefaciens SP1 showed very high retaining and reuse ability as compared to that already reported.

Whole cell immobilization is one of the common techniques for increasing the overall cell concentration and productivity. Among the immobilization methods for microbial cells, entrapment is the most suitable and common method. Immobilization by entrapment is known to be a simple and gentle procedure and protects the cells from unfavorable conditions (pH, temperature, etc.) from the surrounding media (Kumar and Vats 2010). Whole cell immobilization technique is generally used for higher productivity by protecting the cells from shear forces. In addition to this, the product and the cell can easily be separated, so that the cells can be reused several times (Adinarayana et al. 2005). Immobilization of cells may allow continuous operation of cultivation at high dilution rates. This strategy protects the cells from shear forces. Immobilization of protease-producing cells has been performed by different authors (Rao et al. 2008; Anwar et al. 2009; Sankaralingam et al. 2012; Geethanjali and Subash 2013).

Different matrices like agar, calcium alginate and polyacrylamide were used for immobilization of a definite amount of logarithm phase, B. amyloliquefaciens SP1 cells. Similarly, a free cell system of equal initial cell concentration was also run (Figs. 1, 2, 3). The present investigation revealed the optimum incubation period of different matrices for alkaline protease production. The data indicated that protease production in different matrices started from 24 h and reached maximum at 48 h in case of agar and polyacrylamide matrices, whereas for calcium alginate matrix the maximum alkaline protease production was achieved in 60 h. The results of the present investigation is in disagreement with previous studies (Adinarayana et al. 2005; Kumar and Vats 2010) that showed a higher level of alkaline protease production in 24 h by agar, polyacrylamide and calcium alginate matrices. However, the results are in agreement with those from other investigations that found 48 h as optimum incubation time for these matrices-entrapped cells (Sankaralingam et al. 2012). The production of alkaline protease was found to be associated with the population of the cells in the medium, resulting from the multiplication of the number of immobilized cells leaked from the beads, i.e., cell leakage population which increased up to 48 h in case of agar and polyacrylamide immobilization and up to 60 h in case of calcium alginate immobilization. This implies that the number of entrapped cells gradually decreases with increase in incubation time and so is the case with alkaline protease production (Adinarayana et al. 2005).

The results in Fig. 4, 5, 6 indicate that maximum alkaline protease production, i.e., 4200 µg/ml/min, was detectable after 48 h with polyacrylamide-entrapped cells as compared to other immobilized matrices and free cell system, Polyacrylamide was earlier successfully used for immobilization of many enzyme systems. It was used for the immobilization of cells for the production of other primary metabolites (Adinarayana et al. 2005). The results of the present investigation are in line with the findings of Abdel-Naby et al. and Kumar and Vats, who has reported maximum alkaline protease production by B. mycoides and B. subtilis on polyacrylamide matrix as compared to agar, gelatin and calcium alginate. Although alkaline protease titer obtained with other matrices such as agar, calcium alginate was low, but these natural polymers were also employed for cell immobilization. They employed gel as a carrier material for the immobilization of different enzyme systems which include protease (Rao et al. 2008), β-galactosidase and penicillin acylase (Ramakrishna and Prakasham 1999). It is evident that the alkaline protease production was higher with immobilized cells (4200 µg/ml/min) than that of free cells (3450 µg/ml/min).

The semi-continuous fermentation was terminated to investigate the stability of the biocatalysts and their ability to produce alkaline protease under repeated batch cultivation conditions. Figures 4, 5 and 6 show the possibility for reuse of the polyacrylamide-immobilized cells to produce alkaline protease in semi-continuous mode. The results revealed that the amount of enzyme production with polyacrylamide-immobilized cells gradually decrease in alkaline protease titer from the first batch onward. At the same time, the gradual cell leakage from the gel was observed from the first to the ninth batch. There is no disintegration of the beads; however, a huge loss of protease activity was observed as compared to the first batch of fermentation. Thus, the repeated batch fermentation with polyacrylamide beads was successfully run for nine batches (18 days). These findings were in accordance with those obtained previously for the protease production by immobilized Pseudomonas sp. in polyacrylamide beads (Sankaralingam et al. 2012). The agar and calcium alginate-entrapped cells were also used for repeated batch fermentation. The behavior for these systems was similar to polyacrylamide cells. With all these systems, relatively low enzyme titer was observed when compared with polyacrylamide cells. Also, the cell leakage from the respective gels was more and gel cubes of agar disintegrated after five batches of fermentation.

Thus, polyacrlyamide was found superior to other matrices, as a maximum total protease titer (24,847 µg/ml/min) was obtained with this system which was higher than that in other reports. The present study reported that even after the immobilized cells had been in use for about 18 days, it still possessed significant alkaline protease production. It has been shown that immobilized cells were able to produce alkaline protease consistently and that they might be used for continuous alkaline protease production (Beshay 2003).

In the present investigation, the role of immobilized alkaline protease produced by B. amyloliqefaciens SP1 in detergent was studied. Rapid bloodstain removal was noticed with supplementation of commercially available detergents, i.e., Ariel with immobilized protease in less than 25 min. However, individual treatment of distilled water, detergent (1 % Ariel) and immobilized enzyme was not able to remove stains. There are few reports showing the use of immobilized protease as detergent additive; however, similar results were noticed with protease of B. alveayuensis CAS 5 (Annamalai et al. 2013).
