
Abstract

Shoot regeneration in safflower (Carthamus tinctorius ‘AKS 207’ and ‘PKV Pink’) genetically transformed using Agrobacterium was used for assessing various constraints to the efficiency of transformation including infection period, virulence induction medium, co-cultivation period, bacterial titre, selection regime, and the natural phenolic compound acetosyringone. Transformation frequency was promising with 8–10-day-old cotyledonary leaf explants. Therefore, explants of that age cultured on Agrobacterium minimal medium (AB) containing 100 µM acetosyringone were infected with Agrobacterium (cell titre 0.5 OD600nm) for 15 min followed by 48 h of co-cultivation on kanamycin-enriched medium (50 mg/L). Transformation of the shoots was confirmed using β-glucuronidase (GUS) histochemical assay and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). With the transformation protocol thus optimized, the transformation frequency as determined using GUS assays was 54.0 % for AKS 207 and 47.6 % for PKV Pink. The corresponding figures using PCR were 27.0 and 33.3 %. The transformed shoots required 10–14 weeks of culture initiation but produced very few roots.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0497-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Safflower (Carthamus tinctorius), family Asteraceae (Compositae), is annually cultivated in the tropics and subtropics of the world. It is cultivated mainly for its seeds and flowers which have commercial values (Vijaya Kumar et al. 2008). The flowers are useful in medicine, as a source of a colouring agent and of fibres, and for food flavouring. Safflower oil is rich in linoleic acid (75–90 %) and is believed to lower cholesterol levels in blood. Safflower is, therefore, important in food, pharmaceutical, paint, and lubricant industries (Lijiao and Meili 2013). Safflower oil commands a higher price than other edible oils, but the higher price is offset by the potential health benefits of the oil (Li and Mündel 1996). Safflower is particularly suited for molecular farming and is used in the production of human insulin, lipoproteins, growth hormones, and specialty oils of high nutritional value (Shilpa et al. 2010). A major drawback of safflower is that it is susceptible to insect pests. The safflower aphid (Uroleucon compositae) is the most serious pest, which is estimated to reduce yields by 30–80 % (Hanumantharaya et al. 2008); at the same time, the existing measures for pest control are expensive, and various management practices and breeding strategies are not particularly effective.

Genetic engineering offers some advantages over traditional methods of breeding, and Agrobacterium-meditated transformation of genes has become a gold standard (Shingote et al. 2015; Kharte et al. 2016), a method that integrates fewer copies of trans genes into plants compared to the biolistic method and is, therefore, the preferred method for obtaining stable expression of trans genes and avoiding trans gene silencing (Joyce et al. 2010; Ramesh et al. 2004). In this process, only the T-DNA region of the vector is transferred, a region engineered to encompass a selectable marker, a reporter gene, and the genes of interest, which are then transferred from the bacterium to the host plant’s nuclear genome. These functions are facilitated by a set of Virulence (Vir) genes in the presence of acetosyringone (AS), a phenolic inducer released by wounded plant cells (Ali et al. 2007).

Safflower, however, has not proved amenable to genetic manipulation: in vitro regeneration has proved difficult; and Agrobacterium-mediated transformation has been tried in only a few varieties of safflower (Ying et al. 1992; Nikam and Shitole 1999; Rao and Rohini 1999; Rohini and Rao 2000; Belide et al. 2011; Motamedi et al. 2011). The present work, therefore, examines some of the transformation parameters in detail to find out ways to deploy genetic transformation in two safflower genotypes, namely AKS 207 and PKV Pink.


