
Abstract

Natural plant products have been widely used in controlling cancer with fewer or no side effects and the use of plant extracts as complementary to synthetic medicine is gaining increased popularity. Members of Andrographis plants possess important medicinal properties. In the present study, anti-cancerous properties of Andrographis nallamalayana (AN) were tested on A375 and B16F10 skin melanoma cancer cell lines. The leaf extracts of AN significantly reduced the cell viability and cell survival of skin cancer cell lines, achieved by MTT assay and clonogenic assays, respectively. Further, TUNEL assays revealed that AN extracts induces the apoptosis. Western blot analysis revealed that AN leaf extracts reduced the expression of Bcl-2, an anti-apoptotic protein and induced the expression of proapoptotic molecules such as Bcl-2 associated death promoter protein (BAD), Bcl-2 associated X protein (BAX) and cleaved caspase-3. Moreover, the qRT-PCR and western blot analysis demonstrated the reduced expression of G2/M phase proteins cdk1, cyclin B1 and increased expression of p53, cyclin-dependent kinase 1 inhibitor, p21. Further, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that AN reduced the NF-κB nuclear translocation, luciferase reporter assays demonstrated reporter gene activation. qRT-PCR assays showed that AN significantly reduced the expression of NF-κB target genes. The results concluded that the extracts of AN exhibited significant anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory and pro-apoptotic activities on melanoma skin cancer cell lines.



Introduction

Medicinal plants were being used to treat various chronic diseases from ancient times. Natural plant products have shown their potentiality in controlling cancer while exhibiting less or no side effects and the use of plant extracts as complimentary to modern medicine is gaining increased popularity. Up to 80 % population in the developing countries is depending on herbal medicine to heal different diseases and they are inaccessible to allopathic medicine (Ekor 2014; Pandey et al. 2013; Mzid et al. 2012; Rates 2001). Some species of Andrographis gained its own importance due to their important medicinal values and an effective anti-cancerous source (Agbonlahor et al. 2014; Dhiman et al. 2012; Abhishek et al. 2010). Members of Andrographis are widely used in various ailments; particularly, Andrographis paniculata Nees (A. paniculata) used in the treatments of wide varieties of diseases in traditional systems of the medicine (Agbonlahor et al. 2014). A. paniculata extracts were tested against variety of cancer cell lines and reported that compounds isolated from the extracts exhibited potent anti-tumor activity against all the investigated cancer cell lines (Luo et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2014; Geethangili et al. 2008; Rajagopal et al. 2003). It has also been showed that the methanol extract of A. paniculata was subjected to fractionation and reported that dichloromethane fraction of methanolic extract possessing cytotoxic activity and also potent immunostimulating activity (Sagadevan et al. 2015; Churiyah et al. 2015; Ajay et al. 2004). However, it was also reported that there were also adverse side effects of A. paniculata which may include gastric upset, headache, bitter taste and fatigue. Moreover, reports revealed that the high doses of A. paniculata may affect the normal functions of liver (Prakash et al. 2013). Hence, exploring more species of the Andrographis for medicinal properties including anticancer properties may prove to be worthwhile.

AN which was used in this study is procumbent herb, endemic to Nallamala hills, Andhra Pradesh, India. This herb was known to be used for treating mouth ulcers (Venkata Ratnam and Venkata Raju 2005) as well as leukoderma in folklore medicine and recent reports showed that parts of this herb were persisting antimicrobial and anti-psoriatic properties, respectively (Padma and Venkata Raju 2013; Parlapally et al. 2015). However, the anticancerous properties of AN are hitherto unknown. In the present study, we examined the anti-cancerous properties such as antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of the methanolic extracts of AN on skin cancer cell lines, A375 and B16F10 and unraveled the detailed molecular mechanism of action of the test extracts.


