
Abstract

A large amount of cotton stalk waste biomass with high cellulose content are incinerated by the farmers causing air pollution. The high cellulose content of cotton stalks can be converted to fermentable sugars by fungal delignification pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass and enzymatic saccharification. The effect of particle size, moisture content, and media supplements was studied for delignification of cotton stalks by Daedalea flavida MTCC 145 (DF-2) in solid-state fermentation. The highest lignolytic enzyme activities, optimal lignin degradation 29.88 ± 0.97% (w/w) with cellulose loss 11.70 ± 1.30% (w/w), were observed in cotton stalks at particle size 5 mm with 75% moisture content after 20 days. Cellulolytic enzyme activity increased with decrease in particle size and increased moisture content. The addition of Cu2+, gallic acid, and veratryl alcohol enhanced the lignolytic enzyme production and the lignin degradation. In addition to increased laccase activity, Cu2+ inhibited the cellulolytic activity. Supplements Cu2+ at 0.5 mM/g gave the best results of lignin degradation 33.74 ± 1.17% (w/w) and highest selectivity value (SV) 3.15 after pretreatment. The glucose yield increased to 127.44 ± 4.56 mg/g from 20 day pretreated cotton stalks with Cu2+ supplements, ~threefolds higher than untreated cotton stalks. The study is important for the production of fermentable sugars from cotton stalks residues which can further be utilized in production of bioethanol and other applications.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0548-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The expeditious consumption of non-renewable energy resources has awakened the world to harvest the energy from renewable resources for sustainable growth and development (Tiwari et al. 2013). The bioethanol produced from the food crops, such as corn, has been considered as threat for food security; therefore, replacement of it with economical and most abundantly available lignocellulosic biomass mainly agriculture residues is of great interest (Sun and Cheng 2002). The protective shielding of lignin in lignocellulosic biomass restricts the enzymatic saccharification of holo-cellulose (cellulose and hemicellulose) to fermentable sugars (Fermor 1993). A pretreatment process is necessary to remove the lignin and reduce the cellulose crystallinity from lignocellulosic biomass. Various pretreatment methods, such as physical, chemical and biological methods, are used for delignification of biomass to improve the enzymatic saccharification (Zhang et al. 2007). Biological methods using white-rot fungi (WRF) for pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass have potential to mineralize lignin to CO2 and H2O (Boyle et al. 1992). This unique property of WRF is due to the expression of lignolytic enzyme system which includes phenol oxidase (laccase), lignin peroxidase (LiP), and manganese peroxidase (MnP).

The delignification of lignocellulosic biomass by WRF is associated with the excessive cellulose loss. During pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass, WRF produces cellulolytic enzymes and digest the cellulose for its own growth and metabolism resulting low selectivity value (SV, the ratio of lignin degradation to cellulose loss) (Eriksson et al. 1990). The cellulose loss during pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass by WRF is the major problem, which results in low carbohydrate recovery and low glucose yield after enzymatic saccharification. Pretreatment of cotton stalks with non-selective WRF Phanerochaete chrysosporium was studied by Shi et al. 2009. Although high lignin degradation was obtained, but high cellulose loss was also observed resulting low SV and low glucose yield after enzymatic saccharification. High SV is an important parameter for selective lignin degradation and higher enzymatic saccharification (Wan and Li 2010). Various WRF, such as Daedalea flavida, Cereporiopsis subvermispora, Phlebia radiata, Pleurotus ostreatus etc., have been reported for high SV due to their intrinsic property (Sharma and Arora 2014; Thakur et al. 2013; Wan and Li 2010). The SV was reported in relation to screening of selective lignin degrading fungal strains (Zhang et al. 2007). The SV of fungal strains is influenced by the production of lignocellulolytic enzymes which varies with the variation in particle size, moisture content, etc. Effect of various media supplements (Cu2+, Mn2+, ferulic acid, xylidine, veratric acid, vanillic acid, cinnamic acid, guaiacol, etc.) on production of lignolytic enzymes in solid-state fermentation (SSF) has been studied earlier (Liu et al. 2013). Inhibition of cellulolytic enzyme activities by heavy metals, such as Cu2+ and Mn2+, has been reported earlier (Geiger et al. 1998; Tejirian and Xu 2010). The effect of the above parameters on the production of lignocellulolytic enzymes in relation with SV in pretreatment has not been studied until date.

India is the second largest producer of cotton after China in the world and cultivates the crop in area of 12.19 million hectare (Approx.), which produces abundant lignocellulosic cotton stalk residues as waste. Cotton stalks consisting of 49% holo-cellulose on dry weight basis is good source for production of fermentable sugars (Shi et al. 2012). The present study on pretreatment of cotton stalks by Daedalea flavida MTCC 145 is targeted towards achievement of higher delignification of cotton stalks with minimum cellulose loss, i.e., enhanced SV/recovery of carbohydrates using optimal particle size, moisture content, and supplements.


