
Abstract

The present study was carried out to investigate the impact of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) on the growth of three different crop species, wheat (Triticum aestivum, var. UP2338), cowpea (Vigna sinensis, var. Pusa Komal), and Brassica (Brassica juncea, var. Pusa Jai Kisan), along with their impact on the rhizospheric bacterial diversity. Three different concentrations (0, 50 and 75 ppm) of AgNPs were applied through foliar spray. After harvesting, shoot and root parameters were compared, and it was observed that wheat was relatively unaffected by all AgNP treatments. The optimum growth promotion and increased root nodulation were observed at 50 ppm treatment in cowpea, while improved shoot parameters were recorded at 75 ppm in Brassica. To observe the impact of AgNPs on soil bacterial community, sampling was carried out from the rhizosphere of these crops at 20 and 40 days after the spraying of AgNPS. The bacterial diversity of these samples was analyzed by both cultural and molecular techniques (denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis). It is clearly evident from the results that application of AgNPs changes the soil bacterial diversity and this is further influenced by the plant species grown in that soil. Also, the functional bacterial diversity differed with different concentrations of AgNPs.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0567-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

The use of nanotechnology is increasing in various fields like information technology, energy, consumer goods, medical sector, and agriculture. However, every technology comes with a price; the release of NPs to the environment remains a point of concern, mostly due to the lack of scientific knowledge related to the potential health and environmental risks associated with them. Many studies have raised the concerns on how this release would affect ecosystem health and human safety (Meng et al. 2009; Klaine et al. 2008; Colvin 2003). Unfortunately, little knowledge is available to date despite these concerns. The present study deals with the effect of release of nanoparticles on plants and soil bacterial diversity.

So far, both positive and negative effects of NPs on plants were reported. Hong et al. pointed out that 0.25% nano-TiO2 promoted photosynthesis and nitrogen metabolism resulting in improved spinach growth. Arora et al., while studying the impact of gold NPs on the growth profile and seed yield of Brassica juncea under field conditions, found that out of five different concentrations of gold NPs (0, 10, 25, 50, and 100 ppm), application of 10 ppm concentration resulted in the optimum increase in growth and seed yield of the plants. Stampoulis et al. and Hawthorne et al. exposed zucchini (Cucurbita pepo subspecies pepo) to different NPs and found plant biomass reduction when compared with unexposed or corresponding bulk material controls. Musante and White reported similar trends in NP Ag and Cu phytotoxicity for squash (C. pepo subspecies ovifera), although species-specific differences existed in the magnitude of biomass, transpiration reductions, and extent of element accumulation.

Microorganisms are key regulators of biogeochemical recycling of nutrients in the environment and assist in maintaining the overall health and function of ecosystems. Microorganisms are especially sensitive to environmental changes (Sadowsky and Schortemeyer 1997); the structure and abundance of the microorganism community may shift in response to foreign nanomaterials (Ge et al. 2011; Kumar et al. 2011; Tong et al. 2007). Many nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes (Kang et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2009), graphene-based nanomaterials (Hu et al. 2010), iron-based nanoparticles (Auffan et al. 2009), silver (Sondi and Salopek-Sondi 2004), and copper, zinc, and titanium oxide nanoparticles (Kasemets et al. 2009), have been reported to be toxic to pure cultures of bacteria. However, these studies were conducted in vitro and it is hard to say that NPs have the same effect in the soil as they showed in in vitro conditions. Soil is a very complex system, and physicochemical characteristics such as pH, EC, texture, and organic matter content can alter the properties of NPs introduced in it. This interaction might result in increased or decreased bioavailability and toxicity of NPs (Dimkpa 2014). Many studies support this; fullerenes exposure did not alter the structure and function of the soil microbial community as reported by Tong et al., whereas Ge et al. found that nano-TiO2 and nano-ZnO have negative effects on the soil bacterial communities.

There are limited and inconsistent data regarding the effect of NPs on the soil microbial community and there are no standard and proven methods for assessing their toxicity on soil microbial community. Nevertheless, various methods are used to evaluate the effect of contaminants on the soil microbial community, including viability count, molecular-based methods, carbon utilization patterns, and fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) analysis. In their efforts to check the effect of AgNPs on the microbial diversity and enzyme activity of soil, Hänsch and Emmerling found a significant decrease in microbial mass with increasing AgNPs concentration. However, no treatment effects were found for microbial biomass N, fluorimetric enzymes, and the abiotic soil parameters such as pH and soil organic C.

Kirk et al. reviewed in detail the advantages and disadvantages of each method. All methods when used alone have several limitations (Mehta et al. 2014). Thus, in the current study, culture-dependent and independent methods were used in combination for assessing the ecotoxicity. The community structure was analyzed using PCR-DGGE. The present study aimed to look for the impact of AgNPs on the growth parameters of three different crop plants, T. aestivum (var. UP2338), B. juncea (var. Pusa Jai Kisan), and V. sinensis (var. Pusa Komal), under greenhouse conditions and their influence on rhizospheric bacterial diversity.


