
Abstract

Biomass from wetland aquatic grass and buffalo grass can be exploited for biogas production, because this substrate is plenteous and does not compete with food production. In this study, the grass substrate was physically pretreated by boiling with different retention time to increase its biodegradability and was examined in batch mode. Boiling pretreatment suggested that 100 °C with 2 h retention time was the best condition. The results showed that the optimum grass concentration in the 1:1 ratio of co-digestion mixture with manure produced the highest methane yield. The results suggested that co-digestion of buffalo grass and buffalo dung was a promising approach for improving biogas production. This study was achieved the upgraded biogas through biological purification contained 90.42% CH4 8.04% CO2 1.43% O2 and 0.11% other trace gases—a remarkable performance based on an efficiency criteria. Furthermore, the digestate has high nutrient concentrations that can potentially use as fertilizer.



Introduction

The environmental and global warming consciousness has become an important policy in all countries around the world. Furthermore, the fossil fuel use has been related to some alarming environmental problems such as global warming and climate change (Tsai et al. 2016; Vu et al. 2017). These increasing demands for energy, together with the weakening and limited source of fossil fuels, together with the harmful impacts in the environment, are the reasons industries and governments worldwide are pursuing renewable alternatives. Bioenergy, a renewable energy sources, draws responsiveness due to its accessibility and low carbon dioxide emission (Ramaraj et al. 2016a, b ,c). Thai government has increasingly given an importance on how to solve this problem issues among the first priority in local development.

At present, many agencies have focused on renewable energy such as solar energy, wind energy, hydroenergy and geothermal energy. Renewable sources of energy and consumer products are required for sustainable development of modern society (Unpaprom et al. 2017; Vu et al. 2017). Energy demand required to meet the economic growth of Thailand is growing higher in every year (Dussadee et al. 2017). Accordingly, Thailand has a huge potential to develop renewable energy from biomass as the country has an abundant agriculture sources such as raw materials from crops and livestock that can be used to produce biogas, specifically methane gas, through the decomposition of organic matter in the system (Dussadee et al. 2014; Vu et al. 2018).

Plant biomass is the main source of renewable materials on Earth and represents a potential source of renewable energy and bio-based products (Guo et al. 2015; Wannapokin et al. 2017). Animal manures have been used as a resource of excellent material for anaerobic digestion (AD) with clear environmental benefit, especially for buffalo dung. Since Thailand economy depends mainly on agriculture activities, therefore, utilization of natural resources for energy production is an extremely important issue. Agricultural residues from the agricultural sector, agriculture industry and grassland biomass are usually used as feed materials in anaerobic digestion systems in Thailand which are suitable in numerous ways for producing energy. There are so many types of grasses that are popularly grown in Thailand (Dussadee et al. 2017). Deb et al. stated that the buffalo grass, traditionally raised in a mixed crop livestock system, has played an important role over the centuries, especially in Asia, for the lives of millions of people, by ensuring work power and food at the end of their career as work animals.

Buffalo grass a tropical and invasive growing plant in rural area has only value to be feedstock for animal feeding. These exotic grass weeds are overgrown in abundantly available resources in the Northern region of Thailand. It needs to cut down and removed frequently for fire hazard, and disease and vector controls (Sahoo et al. 2017). The present study investigates the possibility of buffalo grass as a feedstock for biogas production using certain pretreatment. Rösch et al. stated that grass is converted to silage that can be used as feedstock for anaerobic digestion. This can be utilized as raw materials for an environmentally friendly renewable energy, more specifically for biogas production. Additionally, the use of grassland biomass for the biogas production is currently the common practice. Biogas application includes ensuring energy security, decreasing carbon emission and improving economic activity. It can be produced by a single raw material such as pig manure, cow manure and buffalo manure. Furthermore, Thailand is being in top 11 in the countries of Asia for buffalo population.

In present, the production of biogas has been evolving to enhance the efficiency like co-digestion of buffalo dung with grass. Co-digestion of buffalo grass (para grass) with buffalo dung in farm’s around community existing digester becomes a valid approach to enhance biogas production Also, the addition of grass can help raise C:N of the feedstock to be suitable for metabolic activities in anaerobic digestion system. The physical structure and chemical composition of lignocellulosic materials can be altered through various methods of pretreatment, breaking down the linkage between polysaccharides and lignin, thus making cellulose and hemicelluloses more accessible to hydrolytic enzymes (Wannapokin et al. 2018). Therefore, pretreatments could accelerate the hydrolysis process and improve the methane content in the biogas.

Strevett et al. stated that water vapor in biogas is problematic for compressibility and should be removed prior to storage. And biogas typically contains a high percentage of carbon dioxide (CO2), which decreases its caloric value. Finally, hydrogen sulfide (H2S), which is also present in biogas, is toxic and exhibits corrosive effects on process equipment if not removed prior to compression and storage. Physicochemical methods such as physical adsorption, physical absorption or chemical absorption are commonly used to treat biogas. However, these biogas purification methods require costly investment and maintenance which are not suitable for industrial scale and reduce the profit. Therefore, biological purification that takes advantages of photosynthesis process of plant such as microalgae to eliminate CO2 from biogas can be applied to reduce the capital and operations cost as enhance the biogas quality (Ramaraj et al. 2016a, b ,c). Therefore, this study main aim is to assess different pre-treatment and fermentation techniques through experimentation and evaluate each process and improvement of biogas yield. Finally, biogas production from buffalo grass (Brachiaria mutica) co-digestion with buffalo dung) through anaerobic enhanced methane content achieved by microalgae pass biological purification. Additionally, this study aimed to use non-food plant source as a feedstock for biogas production, a renewable energy fuel.


