




Discussion

The workflow described in detail here produces life-sized, individualized brain and hippocampal models in subjects with Alzheimer’s disease or other neurologic conditions. 3D–printed models have demonstrated significant educational value in other medical specialties. When 3D–printed models were used during consultation for pediatric patients with congenital heart disease, the patients’ parents and the cardiologists both rated the usefulness of the models very highly and believed they improved communication during the consultation .

In a double blind trial of undergraduate medical students, 3D models of cardiac anatomy resulted in higher test scores than cadaveric learning . It is anticipated that these brain models would also serve well as educational aids in a variety of settings including individual patient and family education, medical or neurologic training, patient advocacy or support groups, and public health policy or governmental forums. We believe that holding the models and viewing them will help patients and family members understand Alzheimer’s disease as a tangible physical process and lessen the fear, mystery, and shame often associated with the diagnosis. Construction of these models entails a high investment in editing time, but once created they can be a permanent educational resource.

Limitations of our approach are acknowledged. These models are intended to be useful for demonstration and not diagnosis. Hippocampal volumes resulting from our manual correction protocol are not validated as reliable indicators of Alzheimer’s disease. While it is reassuring that our hippocampal models have computed volumes that clearly decline with increasing Alzheimer’s disease severity, validation would require comparison of our computed volumes with volumes of pathologically dissected specimens and reliability testing would require comparison of volumes determined by multiple operators. Manual hippocampal segmentation has been shown to be as or more reliable than auto-segmentation algorithms; however, our protocol of editing auto-segmented files for smoothness would need validation with a large number of patients and controls, and work-intensive manual segmentation is impractical on a large scale . Also, our present models do not clearly display changes in cortical thickness that may represent an important pathology of Alzheimer’s disease . Finally, our models do not portray other important changes in Alzheimer’s disease such as the distribution of amyloid and tau or altered functional activity of the cerebral cortex.

Future directions in the three-dimensional modeling of Alzheimer’s disease will aim at addressing these limitations. Automated segmentation could be performed with impartial mathematical smoothing of atlas-based algorithms or with algorithms based on shape. Such algorithms have the potential to produce smooth models without time-consuming manual editing. A large number of representative brains could be run through the algorithm to establish age-corrected, disease-specific biomarkers that could be compared to other validated automated procedures. Models with diagnostic importance could then be produced on a patient-by-patient basis. Rigid cortical models could be developed that would allow elimination of white matter with printing, thus allowing better appreciation of cortical thinning and improved visualization of the hippocampus in the brain. We are currently planning the mapping of PiB-PET imaging, Tau-PET-imaging and FDG-PET imaging onto our current brain models to demonstrate additional biomarkers for educational purposes.
