
Abstract

A new expression cassette (EC0) consisting of the fused 5′ and 3′ intergenic regions (IGRs) of the Eremothecium cymbalariae translational elongation factor 1α (EcTEF1) gene was evaluated through expression of the bacterial hygromycin B phosphotransferase (hph) resistance gene in the common baker’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Progressively shorter versions of the hph-containing EC cassette (hphEC1 though hphEC6) with trimmed 5′ and 3′ EcTEF1 IGRs were tested for their ability to confer resistance to hygromycin B in S. cerevisiae. Hygromycin B resistance was retained in all six generated hphEC variants up to a concentration of 400 mg/L. The hphEC6 cassette was the shortest cassette to be assayed in this study with 366 and 155 bp of the EcTEF1 5′ and 3′ IGRs, respectively. When tested for deletion of the S. cerevisiae proline oxidase gene PUT1, the hphEC6 cassette was shown to successfully act as a selection marker on hygromycin B-containing medium. The hphEC6 cassette could be placed immediately adjacent to a kanMX4 G418 disulfate resistance marker without any discernable effect on the ability of the yeast to grow in the presence of both hygromycin B and G418 disulfate. Co-cultivation experiments under non-selective conditions demonstrated that a PUT1 deletion strain carrying the hphEC6 cassette displayed equivalent fitness to an otherwise isogenic PUT1 deletion strain carrying the kanMX4 cassette.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-018-1224-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

During the past 4 decades, the genetic engineering of yeasts and other microorganisms has become a multi-billion dollar industry. The common baker’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the most commonly used yeast systems in synthetic biology applications although other species of budding yeasts (phylum Ascomycota, sub-phylum Saccharomycotina) are gaining in popularity. The traditional approaches to genetic engineering in yeast require condition-specific selection marker genes for the isolation of successful transformants. The design of dominant selection markers such as antibiotic resistance genes tends to employ promoter sequences from constitutively active and highly transcribed “house-keeping genes” such as those involved in protein synthesis, central carbon metabolism, or cell cycle progression. Strong constitutive promoters may also be desirable for some synthetic biology applications such as the rewiring of metabolic pathways or increasing pathway flux.

Translational elongation factor 1α (Tef1) is one of the most abundant proteins in actively dividing yeast cells (Ghaemmaghami et al. 2003) and the strong activity of the TEF1 gene promoter has lead to the development of a number of expression cassettes based on the TEF1 intergenic regions (IGRs) from yeasts (Müller et al. 1998; Ahn et al. 2007). The 5′ and 3′ IGRs of the TEF1 gene from the filamentous yeast Eremothecium gossypii (syn. Ashbya gossypii) has become one of the most widely used expression cassettes (commonly designated “MX”) for strong, constitutive expression of dominant selection markers in the genetic engineering of yeasts (Steiner and Philippsen 1994; Wach et al. 1994). The MX cassette has been shown to work for the expression of resistance genes in a wide spectrum of yeast species including the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Bähler et al. 1998) despite its very distant evolutionary relationship to budding yeasts (Beimforde et al. 2014).

However, the ubiquity of the MX expression cassette in the design of dominant selection markers for the genetic engineering of yeasts often results in transgenic strains that are modified several times with multiple MX cassettes carrying different resistance genes. The repeated use of the MX cassette or any other sequence element within genomic integration constructs will progressively decrease targeting efficiency of subsequent transformations within the same yeast genome (Davidson and Schiestl 2000). Accumulation of integrated sequence elements that contain longer stretches of identical sequence also introduces a risk of undesirable chromosomal rearrangements during genetic crosses and may introduce artifacts in high-throughput genetic analyses such as synthetic genetic arrays. Repeated use of a single or a limited sub-set of expression cassettes can also be problematic in synthetic biology applications such as heterologous expression of multigene biosynthetic pathways, where tandem arrays containing identical regulatory sequences can result in recombination-mediated excision of transgenes.

In the case of selection markers, one approach to circumvent the accumulation of identical regulatory elements within the genome of a yeast strain has been to remove the selection marker post-integration through heterologous expression of a recombinase such as Cre (Güldener et al. 1996). This approach has the added advantage of enabling repeated use of the same selection marker and thereby selection strategy. However, repeated recombinase-mediated selection marker recycling in S. cerevisiae has been shown to cause significant chromosomal rearrangements and gene loss (Solis-Escalante et al. 2015). An alternative approach is to introduce expression cassettes containing new promoter and terminator elements. For instance, there have been variants of the MX cassette described where the EgTEF1 terminator sequence have been substituted for that of other genes such as the S. cerevisiae ADH1 and CYC1 genes (Janke et al. 2004). Although this reduces the risk of unwanted recombination events with any pre-existing MX cassettes within the yeast genome, it also introduces a new risk of recombination events with the endogenous terminator elements of the ADH1 and CYC1 genes if these cassettes were to be used in the transformation of S. cerevisiae.

Newly sequenced yeast genomes are valuable resource for new regulatory sequences for heterologous expression of selection markers and other transgenes. As IGRs are non-coding, they evolve faster than coding gene sequences while retaining their regulatory function in related species. Thus, a promoter or terminator element can be transplanted into the genome of a more distantly related species and function, even though the overall sequence homology between promoters may be beyond detection. The present study sought to develop a new constitutive expression cassette based on the IGRs of the TEF1 gene from the filamentous yeast Eremothecium cymbalariae, which is the closest relative of E. gossypii with a sequenced genome at the time of writing (Wendland and Walther 2011).


