
Abstract

Only a few Impatiens spp. from South India (one of the five centers of diversity for Impatiens species) were included in the published datum of molecular phylogeny of the family Balsaminaceae. The present investigation is a novel attempt to reveal the phylogenetic association of Impatiens species of South India, by placing them in the global phylogeny of Impatiens based on a combined analysis of two chloroplast genes. Thirty species of genus Impatiens were collected from different locations of South India. Total genomic DNA was extracted from fresh plant leaf, and polymerase chain reaction was carried out using atpB–rbcL and trnL-F intergenic spacer-specific forward and reverse primers. Thirteen sequences of Impatiens species from three centers of diversity were obtained from GenBank for reconstructing the evolutionary relationships within the genus Impatiens. Bayesian inference analysis was carried out in MrBayes v.3.2.2. This analysis supported Southeast Asia as the ancestral place of origin of extant Impatiens species. Molecular phylogeny of South Indian Impatiens spp. based on combined chloroplast sequences showed the same association as that of morphological taxonomy. Sections Scapigerae, Tomentosae, Sub-Umbellatae, and Racemosae showed Southeast Asian relationship, while sections Annuae and Microsepalae showed African affinity.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0574-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Two genera, namely, Impatiens and Hydrocera, are the sole members of the family Balsaminaceae. The genus Hydrocera is monotypic. Impatiens is a large genus containing more than 1000 species with a distribution pattern in the mountain areas of old world tropics and subtropics (Janssens et al. 2006). The five biodiversity hotspots for this highly endemic genus have been identified as Southeast Asia, Southern India and Sri Lanka, tropical Africa, Madagascar, and the Eastern Himalayas (Yuan et al. 2004; Janssens et al. 2006). Several novel species, belonging to this explosively speciating plant, are recognized in these regions every year (Kuang et al. 2014; Gogoi and Borah 2014; Luo et al. 2015). The genus Impatiens contains more than 210 species in India with amazing localization in two biodiversity hotspots, namely, Himalayas in the north of India and the Western Ghats in the south of India. Over half of these occur in the Western Ghats of India and at least 103 species of Impatiens are endemic to the Western Ghats alone (Bhaskar 2012).

Molecular phylogeny of balsams based on ITS sequences (Yuan et al. 2004) proposed that extant Impatiens species are of Southeast Asian origin, from where it dispersed to other parts of the globe in several dispersal events. Contrarily, atpB–rbcL intergenic spacer sequences based on phylogenetics of Janssens et al. suggested that Impatiens originated in South China from which it colonized the nearby regions and afterwards dispersed to north America, India, Africa, the Southeast Asian peninsula, and the Himalayan area. All these published data of molecular phylogeny and biogeography of Balsaminaceae inferred from ITS sequences (Yuan et al. 2004) and chloroplast atpB–rbcL spacer sequences (Janssens et al. 2006) contained only a few samples of Impatiens species from South India, creating a gap in the existing phylogeny of balsams. Hence, this work is a novel attempt on the molecular phylogeny of Impatiens species with representatives from six sections of balsams from South India.


