




Discussion

In an attempt to minimize medical errors, the simulation of medical procedures has become a common approach in medical training. In this scenario, simulating the specific characteristics of a patient constitutes a challenge . The use of negative molds is a well-known method to reproduce morphology . However, it is impossible to copy internal structures or organs for in-vivo studies of human cases. The use of 3D printers enables the development of realistic phantoms with anatomically and spatially accurate shapes . Previous studies have reported the use of 3D printing to reproduce the patient’s anatomy for surgical and treatment planning and to facilitate understanding of the normal and pathologic anatomy of individual patients in different situations, such as aneurysm . Weinstock et al. used 3D printing and silicone molding and relied on the aid of Hollywood special effects technicians, who finished the model with makeup, to improve realism . Therefore, the combination of 3D printing and molding technique helps to accelerate object manufacture . Compared to 3D printing, in this study the silicone molds enabled faster production of multiple copies with the same details and even allowed the preparation of materials that are not yet available for 3D printing. We also verified that the soft tissue-mimicking material SEBS bore a striking resemblance to the patient’s brain cortex anatomy and enabled haptic feedback for surgical procedures. Further development should allow mimicking of internal brain structures and dynamic functions, such as blood circulation.

External details of the PLA printed face provided anatomical landmarks that may help surgeons to plan the surgery, thereby improving realistic training. We planned the craniotomy on the basis of the traditional pterional craniotomy approach. Figures 4b and c show that the virtual planning and the final phantom were very similar. To improve the total time, we used a printing layer of 0.1 mm. If necessary, layers of 0.03 mm might be used to achieve a better level of details. Virtual printing planning is not always identical to the final printed piece . Printing errors may cause deformations, overlaps, or missing areas as compared to the planning file . Due to these errors, the layer height and other parameters, such as infill ratio, printing speed, and support settings should be considered for each case, and the printed object must be analyzed before it is used. In this study, another important observation concerned the dimensions of the object to be printed; the patient-specific model presented herein almost reached the limit of the 3D printer (Zmorph - printing area 300 × 235 × 165 mm). Therefore, manufacturing models of older or bigger patients would demand that pieces subdivided for printing and then used to mount the final phantom.

Fusion of the phantom CT images and of the native T1-weighted MRI scans revealed a brain shift in the patient-specific phantom as compared to the real patient’s data. Figure 3b highlights the difference between the patient’s MRI scan (Fig. 3a) and the phantom CT image (Fig. 3c). Future development of the procedure presented here should improve the methods for brain positioning inside the skull. Fixed guiding points could improve brain mounting by diminishing the shift in relation to the original anatomy. Another possibility would be to use neuronavigation to refine orientation during model construction.

Patient-specific phantom assessment revealed a didactic potential for medical training, mainly for unusual diagnosis. The insertion of individual characteristics during training for a specific surgery might minimize serious errors like operating on the wrong side or on the wrong patient. Moreover, phantoms allow for exhaustive training by repetition of a specific procedure step anywhere and anytime. Not only surgeons but the entire medical team can practice with patient-specific phantoms, thereby increasing the total training time and respective individual learning curves .

Multiscale models have been developed and tested for neurosurgery training with neuronavigation. The InVesalius Navigator software enables real-time localization and digitization of anatomical structures with fiducial registration errors within the limits recommended by the specialized literature for clinical practice, i.e. below 3 mm . Neuronavigation on B50 and B100 provided more accurate and precise distance measurements as compared to neuronavigation on B25. The smallest model showed higher deviations for the measurements, specifically for the LE-RE and the RE-N distances. Both pairs of anatomical landmarks had the right ear as one of the references, which suggested that a possible systematic deviation was associated with the acquisition of the coordinates in B25. Indeed, we expected that B25 would provide lower-quality results as compared to B50 and B100 because the small scale approximated all the measurements to the uncertainty levels. Furthermore, none of the remaining references showed any difference associated with distance measurements across scale factors. A possible explanation is that visually localizing the same reference points on the smallest model is more difficult compared to the larger ones. We should emphasize that B50 had enough accuracy for simulation purposes. Reducing the scale of printed models without quality loss might help to reduce the protocol duration and the costs in future iterations. Thus, neuronavigation with B50 might be a suitable alternative to the real size model because it provided similar visual detailing.

It is important to note that, direct comparison between production time and measurement might be limited because the three scaled models were produced using different devices and materials. Nevertheless, it is expected that production time is shorter for smaller models, and different materials might have a small impact in measurements during neuronavigation as the resolution from the printing devices are significantly greater than from the measurement device.
