
Abstract

Virginiamycin produced by Streptomyces virginiae as a natural mix of macrocyclic peptidolactones M and S is widely used in the industrial production of ethanol fuel and as an antibiotic feed additive for cattle and poultry. Its main antimicrobial components, M1 and S1 factors, act synergistically if the M1:S1 ratio in the final product is 70–75:25–30. This fact significantly complicates the development of stable high-yield strains suitable for industrial application. In the previous work, authors obtained a mutant S. virginiae VKM Ac-2738D strain, characterized by a high productivity in flasks and the optimum M1:S1 ratio (75:25) in the final product. In this study, the scale-up of the virginiamycin production by VKM AC-2738D from shake flasks to a pilot-scale (100 L) stirred fermentor was carried out and the possibility of the in situ use of synthetic adsorbing resins to remove virginiamycin from culture broth was assessed. After the optimization of pH and dissolved oxygen concentration (6.8–7.0 and 50%, respectively), the fed-batch fermentation of VKM Ac-2738D with continuous addition of 50% sucrose solution (5 g/L/day starting from 48 h of fermentation) resulted in a final virginiamycin titer of 4.9 g/L. Among four tested resins, Diaion® HP21 added to fermentation medium prior to sterilization absorbed 98.5% of the total virginiamycin that simplifies its further recovery procedure and increased its total titer to 5.6 g/L at the M1:S1 ratio of 74:26. The developed technology has several important advantages, which include the optimum M1:S1 ratio in the final product, the possibility to use sucrose as a carbon source instead of traditionally used and more expensive glucose or d-maltose, and selective binding of up to 98.5% of produced virginiamycin on the adsorbing resin.



Introduction

Virginiamycin, an antibiotic produced by Streptomyces virginiae, belongs to the streptogramin group and represents a natural mix of two synergistic factors, M (hybrid polyketide-peptide) and S (peptide). The main antimicrobial components of the antibiotic are the M1 and S1 factors. One of the unique features of the virginiamycin biosynthesis is a simultaneous production of both M1 and S1 at a ratio providing their maximum synergistic activity in the suppression of the protein biosynthesis in susceptible microorganisms (Di Giambattista et al. 1989). The maximum synergism is observed when M1 and S1 are present in the optimum ratio of 70–75:25–30; in this case, the total antimicrobial activity of virginiamycin increases 3.5–4 times (Mast and Wohlleben 2014). There is also another point of view based on the study of antimicrobial characteristics of quinupristin/dalfopristin, another antibiotic of the virginiamycin group, at different ratios of its components (Jamjian et al. 1997). This study showed no significant difference between various quinupristin/dalfopristin ratios. Nevertheless, there were no similar studies concerning virginiamycin, i.e., the idea of the best synergistic ratio of its components still has not been disproved.

Virginiamycin M1 and S1 alone exhibit bacteriostatic activity, but their synergic combination possesses bactericidal activity (Mast and Wohlleben 2014). In addition, virginiamycin can be used as a growth stimulator, since it optimizes the absorption and metabolism of nutrients, improves the state of small intestine epithelium, and inhibits the synthesis of harmful toxins and metabolites by gut organisms (Feighner and Dashkevicz 1987; Cervantes et al. 2002).

Virginiamycin is actively used for the industrial production of ethanol fuel (Hynes et al. 1997; Arshad et al. 2011); in addition, some countries, including USA, Russia, Brazil, and China, allow its use as an antibiotic feed additive for cattle and poultry (Hofacre et al. 1998; Singh et al. 2008; Shojadoost et al. 2013). By 2020, the predicted increase in the consumption of this antibiotic in North America, Europe, and Asia will be 6% (Chem-Report 2015).

To produce a sufficient volume of virginiamycin, the development of high-yield industrial S. virginiae strains and improved technologies for their cultivation are required. However, the biosynthesis of virginiamycin components is controlled by a lot of different regulators (Pulsawat et al. 2009), and its antibiotic efficiency depends on the correct M1:S1 ratio, so the development of stable overproducing strains seems to be an extremely difficult task. An indirect evidence of this fact is a very small number of publications on the strain improvement of S. virginiae. The productivity of strains reported in various publications is relatively low and varies from 0.28 to 1.9 g/L (Biot 1984; Prikrylova et al. 1987; Zvenigorodskii et al. 2001; Zhao et al. 2011). An additional increase of the strain productivity can be achieved by medium improvement and optimization of fermentation conditions, but even in this case the productivity of the existing industrial strains remains mainly within the range 3–4 g/L (Biot 1984; Zhao et al. 2011; Han et al. 2013). Thus, the problem of the development of overproducing S. virginiae strains and technologies for the industrial biosynthesis of virginiamycin is still relevant.

In our previous study, a high-yield S. virginiae strain, characterized by the basic productivity of about 2.6 g/L and the optimal M1:S1 ratio in the final product, has been obtained by induced UV mutagenesis from the VKPM Ac-790 strain, whose productivity was only 0.6 g/L (Dzhavakhiya et al., unpublished manuscript). After the completion of the strain identification and the study of its biochemical and physiological properties, the strain was deposited at the All-Russian Collection of Microorganisms (Skryabin Institute of Biochemistry and Physiology of Microorganisms, Pushchino, Russia) under the accession no. VKM Ac-2738D.

After the medium improvement, the productivity of new strain in flasks reached 4.3 g/L, while the M1:S1 ratio remained synergistic (75:25). One should note that the majority of publications and patents describing the development of virginiamycin-producing strains do not contain information on the determination of this ratio in the synthesized product. At the same time, possible violation of the synergistic M1:S1 ratio during the virginiamycin biosynthesis may result in the necessity of additional technological stages intended to either correct this ratio, or to separate M1 and S1 components during the isolation and purification process for their further mixing in the required proportion in the final formulation. Therefore, the VKM Ac-2738D strain has an additional advantage that increases its value for the industrial production of virginiamycin.

An increased productivity of industrial antibiotic-producing strains often results in a self-inhibiting effect of their metabolites able to suppress not only their own biosynthesis, but also the growth and development of a microorganism. One of the ways to reduce possible cytotoxicity and self-inhibition effects of accumulated target product is fermentation in the presence of adsorbing resins able to selectively remove the product from the culture broth (Phillips et al. 2013). However, this method requires the selection of a certain resin type for each metabolite, since even resins with similar characteristics can provide opposite results, either increasing, or reducing the content of a target product in culture broth (Lam et al. 1995; Warr et al. 1996). A correct adsorbent selection can provide a very significant (sometimes 100-fold) yield increase (Singh et al. 2010). In spite of a large number of publications describing the use of adsorbing resins in the microbial production of biologically active substances, we did not find any information on the use of such resins in the virginiamycin production, though the use of adsorbing resins was reported to increase the production of a similar antibiotic, pristinamycin, by 1.25–1.55 times (Jia et al. 2006, Zhang et al. 2012).

The purpose of this study was the scale-up of the virginiamycin production by S. virginiae VKM Ac-2738D from shake flasks to a pilot-scale (100 L) stirred fermentor and the assessment of the possibility of in situ use of synthetic adsorbing resins to bind produced virginiamycin.


