
Abstract

Used engine oil (UEO) constitutes a serious environmental problem due to the difficulty of disposal off or reuse. Ten bacterial strains with biodegradation potential were isolated from UEO-contaminated soil sample using enrichment technique. Two strains which exhibited the highest degradation %, 51 ± 1.2 and 48 ± 1.5, respectively, were selected. Based on the morphological, biochemical characteristics and 16S rRNA sequence analysis, they were identified as Ochrobactrum anthropi HM-1 (accession no: KR360745) and Citrobacter freundii HM-2 (accession no: KR360746). The different conditions which may influence their biodegradation activity, including UEO concentration (1–6 %, v/v), inoculum size (0.5–4 %, v/v), initial pH (6–8), incubation temperature (25–45 °C), and rotation speed (0–200 rpm), were evaluated. The optimum conditions were found to be 2 % UEO, 2 % inoculum size, pH 7.5, incubation temperature 37 °C, and 150 rpm. Under the optimized conditions, strains HM-1, HM-2, and their mixture efficiently degraded UEO, they achieved 65 ± 2.2, 58 ± 2.1, and 80 ± 1.9 %, respectively, after 21 days of incubation. Biodegradation of UEO was confirmed by employing gas chromatography analysis. Gamma radiation (1.5 kGy) enhanced the degradation efficiency of irradiated bacterial mixture (95 ± 2.1 %) as compared to non-irradiated (79 ± 1.6 %). Therefore, strains HM-1 and HM-2 can be employed to develop a cost-effective method for bioremediation of used engine-oil-polluted soil.



Introduction

Pollution due to petroleum hydrocarbons and its derivatives, including diesel fuel, gasoline, heavy oil, motor oil, fuel residues, and mineral oil, has an increasing influence on the environmental reconquest (Su et al. 2011). They have been recognized as one of the most hazardous wastes (Udeani et al. 2009). Motor oil is a mixture of base lubricant oil and additives, and the base oil contains long-chain (C16–C36) saturated hydrocarbons and more than 75 % cyclic alkanes (Koma et al. 2003). One billion gallons of waste lubricating oil (also called spent oil) are generated during oil-changing processes from automobile and mechanical workshops, a few of this huge amount is recycled, and most is disposed off by incineration or dumping. Therefore, there is a need to appropriate recycling to avoid their dangerous threat towards the environment (Kalyani and Pandey 2014). Used motor oil contains more metals, toxic, and carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Thus, it constitutes a potential threat to humans, animals, and vegetation (Adelowo et al. 2006). Treatment of contaminated soil and water resources takes place using mechanical methods, such as skimming and chemical methods, such as surfactants and dispersants; nevertheless, these methods are costly and with limited efficiency (Huang et al. 2008). In contrast, the utilization of microorganisms to degrade such pollutant has been found to be a promising alternative (Akio et al. 2006). Microorganisms have potential to detoxify hazardous organic compounds by means of polymerization, mineralization, or transformation (Sarma and Sarma 2010). Therefore, as compared to other technologies, microbial degradation (bioremediation) is the method of choice, because it is cost-effective, safe, and environmentally accepted (Singh et al. 2009). Bioremediation process depends on the ability of microorganisms to remove the hydrocarbon pollutants completely (Gómez et al. 2007). Interestingly, numerous hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms are capable of producing biosurfactants/emulsifiers agents that could increase the solubility of these sparingly or insoluble substrates and facilitate their utilization as sole carbon sources (Franzetti et al. 2010; Su et al. 2011).

Several reports have been established on biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbons of used engine-oil-contaminated soils. Husaini et al. had successfully demonstrated the ability of 18 indigenous fungal isolates, isolated from local motor-oil-contaminated areas that were capable of degrading the aliphatic hydrocarbons. Penicillium species (P1) completely degrades the n-alkanes in the used motor oil after 2 months of incubation. Su et al. demonstrated the motor-oil-degrading potential of an indigenous Pseudomonas aeruginosa SU-1 bacterial strain. This bacterium was found to have the ability to degrade motor oil efficiently upon growing in a medium containing such pollutant as the sole carbon source. Bhattacharya et al. reported that a newly isolated Ochrobactrum sp. C1 could grow with waste lubricants, as the sole carbon and energy source and degrade a wide range of hydrocarbons present in this waste efficiently. Larik et al. reported the biodegradation of used engine oil and diesel oil using an efficient bacterial consortium A2457: encompassing Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Bacillus pumilus, and B. cereus. Salam in his study established the extensive degradation ability of two Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains RM1 and SK1 on waste engine oil. He reported the potentials of these strains in the degradation of aromatic, aliphatic, and branched alkane components of waste engine oils. Microbial consortiums have been usually suggested for complete biodegradation of petroleum pollutants (Farahat and El-Gendy 2008), since the constituents of hydrocarbon mixtures differ in their solubility, volatility, and susceptibility to biodegradation, and in contrast, the required sets of enzymes cannot be present in a single microbial strain.

To treat contaminated areas, it is important to employ microorganisms which are indigenous to the contaminated sites and provide excellent degradation potential. Therefore, this work aims to isolate, identify, and characterize native used engine oil utilizing bacterial strains, from UEO-contaminated soil samples, and to estimate the biodegradation potential of the most promising strains, both individually and in combination. In addition, the factors which influence the biodegradation potential of such pollutant were investigated. In an attempt to enhance the biodegradation efficiency of these strains, the effect of gamma radiation was also evaluated.


