
Abstract

Extracellular Polysaccharides (EPS) from both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have a great deal of research interest as they protect the producer from different stresses including antibiotics, ionic stress, desiccation and assist in bio-film formation, pathogenesis, adhesion, etc. In this study haloalkaliphilic Bacillus sp., known to cope with osmophilic stress, was selected and screened for EPS production. The EPS were isolated, partially purified and chemical characteristics were documented using liquid FT-IR followed by assessment of heavy metal biosorption (lead, copper and cadmium) using Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS). The EPS extracted from three isolates B. licheniformis NSPA5, B. cereus NSPA8 and B. subtilis NSPA13 showed maximum biosorption of Lead followed by Copper and Cadmium. Of the tested isolates, the EPS from isolate B. cereus NSPA8 showed maximum (90 %) biosorption of the lead.



Introduction

EPS are polymeric substances excreted by the microorganisms when growing in environment of abundance or after establishing in a suppressing one and play a major role in the formation of bio-films to grow on the substrates in environments where normally others cannot colonise (Sutherland 2001). In some species, EPS play an essential role in imparting antibiotic resistance to the organism by denying permeability to the antibiotics (Costerton et al. 1987).

Depending on the genera these EPS are made of different carbohydrates, proteins and their derivatives as hetero as well as homo-polymers, which make them potential contender for multiple field applications. EPS are being actively employed in food, bioremediation and pharmaceutical sectors owing to their gelling nature which allows them to be used as preservative, viscosifying agent, flavouring agent and form super-absorbing gels, biosorption agents etc., (Sutherland 1998; Challouf et al. 2011). It is well established that these EPS have large surface area of interaction particularly with cations (metals), which comes handy during surviving in diverse contaminated areas and the same is applicable in remediation of heavy metal contamination (Pal and Paul 2008).

In this study, a moderately haloalkaliphilic bacteria of the genus Bacillus was studied from artificial hyper saline habitats i.e., solar salterns, which are wide spread in distribution and primarily present in the tropical and sub-tropical regions constructed by humans near coastal regions for the purpose of edible salt production. As the current knowledge regarding potential applications of microbes from artificial hyper saline environments and their applicability in metal detoxification is very limited, this study was focused to evaluate the metal biosorption ability of EPS extracted from three different types of haloalkaliphilicbacteria.


