
Abstract

Novel cry genes are potential candidates for resistance management strategies, due to their different structures and modes of action. Therefore, it is desirable to clone and express novel cry genes from several new isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). In the present study, 28 Bt strains were characterized at morphological and molecular level. All these strains are Gram positive, endospore forming and had shown different crystal morphologies when viewed under the microscope. The ARDRA (16S rDNA PCR-RFLP technique) with AluI, HaeIII, HinfI and TaqI produced unique and distinguishable restriction patterns used for the molecular characterization of these isolates. Based on UPGMA clustering analysis, Bt strains showed significant molecular diversity and the dendrogram obtained differentiated 28 Bt strains into 1 major cluster at a similarity coefficient 0.56. PCR analysis demonstrated that the Bt strains showed diverse cry gene profiles with several genes per strain. The Bt strain G3C1 showed the presence of maximum cry-type genes by PCR. The toxicological characterization of these cry genes will have huge importance in transgenic technology and will be useful in transgenesis of crop plants for better resistance management.



Introduction

Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt), is a Gram-positive, spore-forming soil bacterium that forms parasporal insecticidal crystal proteins during the stationary and sporulation phase of its growth cycle. These proteins are termed delta-endotoxins because of their intracellular location and have been used for many years as successful biological insecticides (Schnepf et al. 1998). Commercial Bt-based bio-insecticides used worldwide are applied at 10–50 g/acre or about 1020 molecules/acre, while chemical pesticides such as organophosphates and synthetic pyrethroids are applied about 8 × 1024 molecules/acre and 3 × 1022 molecules/acre, respectively. Thus, molecular potency of these toxins is 80,000 times better than organophosphates and 300 times greater than synthetic pyrethroids (Feitelson et al. 1992). Search for novel Bt strains may lead to the discovery of novel insecticidal proteins with higher toxicity which will be important for providing alternatives to cope up with the emergence of resistant insect populations. Therefore, there is a need of isolation of large number of Bt strains from diverse geographical conditions and cloning of many new types of insecticidal crystal proteins genes (Ramalakshmi and Udayasuriyan 2010).

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been widely used to characterize the Bt strain collections (Ceron et al. 1995; Bravo et al. 1998; Ferrandis et al. 1999; Beron et al. 2005; Vidal-Quist et al. 2009). This technique is a highly sensitive method for rapid detection and identification of target cry gene sequences requires very small amounts of DNA and allows simultaneous screening of many Bt strains to classify them and predict their insecticidal activities. The efficacy of PCR in identifying the large family of cry genes is based on the presence of conserved regions. Another strategy for the screening is based on the multiplex PCR which uses more than two primers in a mixture of the same reaction (Juarez-Perez et al. 1997).

Continuous exposure to a single kind of Bt toxin can lead to resistance development in insects. Routine replacement of cry genes or pyramiding of cry genes could be useful for effective control of insect pests by Bt transgenic plants. Variation of a single amino acid can significantly influence the level of toxicity in Cry proteins (Udayasuriyan et al. 1994). The applications of Bt products as biopesticides are limited by their narrow host range, low toxicity to the targeted insects and the resistance from insects. Therefore, it is necessary to continuously screen novel cry genes and perform rational design based on a known Cry toxin (Lin et al. 2008). In general, the type of cry and cyt genes present in a strain correlates to some extent with its insecticidal activity (Porcar and Juárez-Pérez 2003). Since India is very rich in biodiversity and genetic resources, different Bt strains available in the country are valuable source for identification of indigenous, novel Bt genes, which could encode more potent toxins due to sequence variations (Jain et al. 2006). In the present study, 28 strains of Bt were characterized and screened for novel cry genes for better resistance management.


