
Abstract

The morphology of Trichoderma reesei is a vitally important factor for cellulase productivity. This study investigated the effect of hyphal morphology on cellulase production in the hyper-cellulolytic mutant, T. reesei DES-15. With a distinct morphology, T. reesei DES-15 was obtained through Diethyl sulfite (DES) mutagenesis. The hyphal morphology of DES-15 batch-cultured in a 5-L fermentor was significantly shorter and more branched than the parental strain RUT C30. The cellulase production of DES-15 during batch fermentation was 66 % greater than that of RUT C30 when cultured the same conditions. DES-15 secreted nearly 50 % more protein than RUT C30. The gene expression level of a set of genes (cla4, spa2, ras2, ras1, rhoA, cdc42, and racA) known to be involved in hyphae growth and hyphal branching was measured by quantitative real-time PCR. The transcriptional analysis of these genes demonstrated that a decrease in gene expressions might contribute to the increased hyphal branching seen in DES-15. These results indicated that the highly branching hyphae in DES-15 resulted in increased cellulase production, suggesting that DES-15 may be a good candidate for use in the large-scale production of cellulase.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s13205-016-0516-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Much research has been performed with the aim of developing renewable energy sources as alternatives to fossil fuels. The high cost of lignocellulosic enzymes for lignocellulosic degradation is one of the most important limiting factors in the bio-refinery of lignocellulosic biomass (Wilson 2009). The bio-refinery industry currently uses lignocellulosic enzymes that are primarily produced by ascomycete fungi, such as species of Trichoderma, Penicillium, or Aspergillus (Gusakov 2011). The enzymes are secreted into fermentation broths at high levels following submerged cultivation. Submerged cultivations permit the easy acquisition of secreted enzymes for downstream fermentation processes (Liu et al. 2013). Submerged cultures are generally employed for the large-scale production of filamentous fungi. Widely recognized as complex systems, submerged cultures could be influenced by many external factors, some of which can affect the hyphal morphology of filamentous fungi (Kaup et al. 2008). In most filamentous fungal fermentation, it is generally believed that the level of productivity is dependent on the ability of the fungus to achieve an optimal morphology (Krull et al. 2013). In Aspergillus niger, increasing the stirring speed and adjusting the glucose concentration promotes citric acid production, thereby resulting in changes to the fungal morphology (Papagianni et al. 1998, 1999; Amanullah et al. 2002). The relationship between the external environment and fungal morphology has been comprehensively investigated as a means to optimize fungal morphology. Numerous studies have demonstrated that changing important parameters during the fermentation process, such as the initial spore concentration, medium composition, pH value, temperature, and agitation, can control fungal morphology (Gibbs et al. 2000; Papagianni 2004; Ferreira et al. 2009; Peciulyte et al. 2014).

Trichoderma reesei have been widely used in a broad range of industrial applications, and have become the main source of lignocellulosic enzymes (Dashtban et al. 2009). Typically, when using submerged cultures for the large-scale production of cellulase, any alteration to the hyphal morphology of T. reesei can greatly influence cellulase yields (Domingues et al. 2000). It is generally believed that protein secretion by filamentous fungi primarily occurs at the young hyphal tips (Gordon et al. 2000), where the cell wall is more porous and facilitates rapid protein secretion (Chang and Trevithick 1972). The process of branching can lead to the emergence of more growing tips that are important for protein secretion (Peberdy 1994). Any internal or external factors that can increase the number of active tips have the potential to improve the overall protein yield (Juge et al. 1998). For example, Ahamed and Vermette reported that the number of hyphal branching and hyphae tips could be controlled through manipulating agitation rates and culture medium composition, a method that could be employed to help improve cellulase activity. However, the previous studies were focused on manipulating only a single parameter, due to the extreme difficulty associated with simultaneously adjusting all influencing factors during fermentation. Nevertheless, obtaining a strain with optimal morphology in submerged cultures is an important factor for the production of cellulase by T. reesei.

In this study, we utilized a hyper-cellulolytic mutant (DES-15) with a unique morphology, where the hyphae appeared to be shorter and more branched during fermentation. DES-15 was originally obtained by dimethyl sulfate (DES) mutagenesis. During the fermentation process, cellulase productivity and protein secretion were significantly improved in the DES-15 mutant when compared to the RUT C30 strain. Furthermore, to elucidate the relationship between hyphal morphology and cellulase productivity, we preformed a transcriptional analysis on DES-15 to determine the genes involved in hyphal branching during the submerged culture process.


