




Discussion

3D printed solutions have been shown to be successful adjuncts to surgical technique. Accurately reproducing a patient’s specific pathologic anatomy for preoperative planning is a common thread. Patient specific custom made anatomic models used in preoperative planning have been shown to decrease operative time and in one report to also decrease intraoperative blood loss . Additionally, models allowing for accurate surgical simulation in orthopedics and cardiovascular procedures have enhanced preoperative decision-making, improved precision and increased work efficiency . Prosthesis fabrication using 3D printed technique is another developing field .

The present study demonstrates that 3D–printed ossicular replacement prostheses are unique in size and shape when using CT imaging as a basis for modeling, and that these differences are detectable by Otologic surgeons, who can accurately match the individual prostheses to their parent bones. The important landmarks within the middle ear are readily detectable during image interpretation of the middle ear. The malleus is usually well seen and masking of that bone is straightforward. The stapes is a much smaller bone and has a much smaller mass to attenuate the CT image beam. As a result the crura of the stapes, the thinnest part of the bone, are not well seen. However, the capitulum and neck of the stapes is more dense, and usually more reliably detected during image interpretation. This is important, because the stapes capitulum is where one side of the prosthesis rests. Once masks are made of these two landmarks a model can be designed and fabricated. The printer used to fabricate the prosthesis used SLA technology. The resolving threshold of the printer is on the order of centimicrons in the XY plane and decimicrons in the Z axis. This allows for an accurate representation of the model to be fabricated without significant intrinsic errors from the printer to be introduced to the prosthesis. The true test of accuracy, however, is if the prosthesis model fits in the space for which it was designed. In four separate trials with different surgeons, each surgeon was able to accurately match the correct prosthesis to its intended temporal bone. This further supports that the differences in size and shape for each prosthesis are meaningful and detectable by the surgeon. Additionally, that it is possible to fabricate a custom made middle ear prosthesis using routine CT imaging of the temporal bone, existing modeling software, and a desktop SLA printer.

Accurate quantification of the middle ear for fabrication of a custom prosthesis presented unique challenges. The process starts with identification of the important landmarks. As previously mentioned, the important landmarks for prosthesis construction are detectable with routine CT imaging protocols. The landmarks form the basis and starting point for fabrication of the prosthesis. As a result, subtle anatomic variation is inherently captured in the design of the prosthesis. Thus, establishing a method to accurately quantify parameters of the prosthesis also captures the subtle anatomic variation from ear to ear. Once the model was designed, then the next challenge is printing this very small part. Almost immediately apparent was the increased risk of losing the part during post processing due to its size. This was mitigated by utilizing a sinter box. The sinter box is a designed cage around a part that is fabricated with the part during the printing process. This, in essence, prints a larger part making it more difficult to lose. Additionally, it also provides a way to label the part and increases ease of handling. The torus cradle as seen in Fig. 7 is the sinter box used during printing of the prosthesis. Persisting conductive hearing loss following ossicular chain reconstruction is multifactorial. The single greatest variable in many cases is likely the underlying disease process, which may render the ear unsuitable for reconstruction over the long term . Chronic infections and associated chronic Eustachian tube dysfunction can result in stiffness of the ossicular remnants, middle ear fibrosis, middle ear atelectasis, recurrent otitis media and other factors that decrease the chances of a satisfactory hearing result, either due to intrinsic limitations to adequate sound conduction, or from displacement and/or extrusion of the prosthesis. Nevertheless, technical factors such as imprecise sizing and placement also play a significant role . These data are supported by the observation that outcomes are not significantly better, if at all, for reconstruction following traumatic ossicular discontinuity, a situation in which chronic infection and Eustachian tube dysfunction are not usually a factor. CT-based, custom 3D printed prostheses should minimize the impact of these variables, and consequently increase success rates.

Inability to accurately simulate the CT imaging in vivo is a technical limitation of the study. The cadaver middle ear used in this study was cut-down to size from the full-sized skull to include only a portion of the surrounding bone. As a result, the attenuation of the CT beam is much less for the cadaver ear and should provide a much better signal to noise ratio when compared to a comparable in vivo image data set. This will need to be addressed in future studies, as the important landmarks needed for prosthesis design are subtle imaging features that may be more challenging to detect on in vivo imaging.

An additional limitation of this study includes a lack of functional data. The design of the prosthesis should allow it to function similarly to existing, predicate models, and as such it would be presumed to result in adequate functional restoration of hearing. However, the present study does not offer comparative data, cadaveric or in vivo, demonstrating similar or better mechanical properties of the 3D reconstructed ossicular chain as compared to existing technologies. Another limitation of this approach, in general, is that it would only apply to clinical scenarios in which the middle ear anatomy will not otherwise be altered by the surgical procedure. If extensive removal of disease, including ossicular remnants, tympanic membrane, and/or portions of the external auditory canal and mastoid are planned, then pre-operative CT will not be able to predict the post-extirpative anatomy. This approach is only useful for patients undergoing a planned, isolated ossicular chain reconstruction, with no other procedural alterations in the anatomy.

Future studies will address these and other issues. Both cadaveric and in vivo functional results of a custom 3D printed prosthesis need to be measured, and compared to existing models. Additionally, the optimal biomaterial choice needs to be determined. Current materials have a high rate of extrusion when supported laterally by the tympanic membrane alone. As such, standard practice is to interpose a cartilage cap over the prosthesis to prevent that untoward outcome. This, however, can potentially dampen sound transmission, and adds another layer of risk for displacement of an element of the reconstruction. The ideal prosthesis would be fully biocompatible, and not require any additional protective layer.
