


Introduction

Plant cell walls contain primarily three organic components, viz. cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. Xylan is the major part of hemicellulose and a complex polysaccharide composed of a backbone of β-1, 4-glycoside-linked xylose residues. Due to the complex structure of xylan, its complete degradation requires coordinated action of several hydrolytic enzymes. Among them, xylanases (E.C. 3.2.1.8) play a crucial role in xylan hydrolysis, as it breaks 1, 4-β-d-xylosidic linkages in xylan to give short xylooligosaccharides. The xylanases are under intensive research due to their potential in food, animal feed, pulp and paper, textiles and for biofuel production (Dhiman et al. 2008). Due to emerging environmental concerns associated with chlorine use and toxicity of chlorine-bleached effluents, xylanases emerge as an attractive and environmentally safe alternative for prebleaching of kraft pulp. Its use prior to bleaching of kraft-cooked pulp has been shown reduced chlorine usage.

Most of the industrial processes are carried out at high temperature and pH in the presence of inhibitors, hence, any xylanase intended to be used for such processes must be robust enough to withstand such conditions (Bajaj and Manhas 2012) and should also be produced in a cost-effective manner so that overall cost economics is not altered. Although xylanases are produced by a wide range of different microorganisms, yet bacteria, due to their ability to grow and produce xylanases at high pH and temperature with minimum or no cellulase production, are widely exploited for xylanase production for industrial applications (Bajaj and Manhas 2012; Dhiman et al. 2008; Raj et al. 2013a). Despite the extensive search for microbial diversity for novel xylanase producers, however, xylanases with thermo and alkali stability are limited (Bajaj et al. 2011) and there remains a strong need for thermostable xylanases. Hence, both approaches requiring exploitation of microbial diversity or by mutagenesis of existing enzymes continue. Apart from this chemical modification, cross-linking, immobilization and treatment with additives have also been tried to improve the properties (Gupta 1991). The addition of polyols to protein solution provides a simple and practical approach for increasing the stability of enzymes. The polyols are thought to promote salt-bridge formation between amino acid residues, which makes the enzyme molecule more rigid and more resistant to thermal unfolding (George et al. 2001; Costa et al. 2002). However, the selection of the appropriate additive depends on the nature of the enzyme. In this study, we carried out purification and characterization of xylanase from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens and studied the effect of polyols on xylanase thermostability and in kraft pulp pre-bleaching.


