




Discussion

The advent of commercially-available 3D printing technology has enabled systematic development of anatomical models for surgical planning. The retrospective study illustrates not only the systemic integration of 3D technology into the medical environment, but it also proposes potential areas of impact within the care system. However, the work herein is not unique to the medical domain. As mentioned, there are numerous publications from case studies to case series and even a few larger studies already in print [5, 7–37]. The novelty of this study is in its earnest attempt to statistically describe the anatomical models’ impact with the intent of informing the design of a subsequent studies/trials.

The various ANOVA tables illustrated consistent reduction in operative time metrics when planned with an anatomical model. Every table illustrates that mean time for the operating room and case length were less when the case was planned with an anatomical model with highly complex disease lesions mean time greater than 90 min. As is suggested with the effect sizes (assuming the sample means and standard deviations would hold if the study population size was increased), the large p-values for the complex congenital cases were a likely consequence of the small study sizes for each of the disease types.

The reduction of these durations may lead to lower morbidity and mortality, especially through the reduction of duration-associated infections . While patient safety and good outcomes are the primary aim for any medical and surgical procedure, it is important to note the economic impact of any new technology into the clinical/surgical workflow. A negative impact may hinder technological adoption. Costs related to morbidity post-surgery are offset by the patient/patient-family, insurance companies, and hospitals. In addition, the time allocated for an operation has an associated cost; either a direct cost per time unit or indirect cost per procedure (depending on the hospital’s business model) [47–49]. By reducing the time an operation takes, the hospital will save both money and resources that would have likely been consumed in a longer operation. The Mayo Clinic has stated in various presentations that one minute of operative time is equivalent to $80–150; several minutes saved in the operative room can translate to cost coverage of the production of an anatomic model. If the time saved is great enough, additional surgeries can take place in a single day, further adding to the economic incentive of anatomical models for complex cases. It is critical to note that while mean time reductions were observed – and in complex lesions the mean difference was quite dramatic – statistical significance was never established. An explanation of this may be due to low sample size and/or high variance (see Section Future Work for a response to this).

The results of the TAM surveys suggest that anatomical models are becoming an accepted new technology. Responses to question 2 revealed positive behavioral attitude to the technology, supporting intention to use anatomical models in standard of care. The other critical component to TAM models, perceived ease-of-use, was not measured in the study as there was not additional work needed from the medical unit. The additional work and resources to generate the models were supported through academic collaborations and philanthropic grants. Investigating ease-of-use will need to be further examined when 3D printing utilizes direct resources from an institution. To better understand the potential intention to use (related here to the usefulness as described by TAM), responses to qualitative questions 3 and 4 were analyzed. Findings from the responses suggest that anatomical models benefited the cardiothoracic surgeons in several key areas: 1) improved spatial acuity, 2) improved surgical planning, 3) addressed deficits from traditional medical imaging.

In a case featuring complex Tetralogy of Fallot, the surgeons positively responded that the anatomic model facilitated spatial acuity related to critical structures:“[W]e needed to understand the relationship between the pulmonary arteries and the anomalous coronary arteies [sic], and needed to plan the reconstruction of the [right ventricular outflow tract]. [T]he 3D model helped understand these [relationships]”.

“[W]e needed to understand the relationship between the pulmonary arteries and the anomalous coronary arteies [sic], and needed to plan the reconstruction of the [right ventricular outflow tract]. [T]he 3D model helped understand these [relationships]”.

The planned intervention for this specific patient was a surgical palliation by placing a shunt between the aorta and pulmonary artery. The shunt’s intention is to circumvent the pulmonary obstruction; however, a common complication is the partial obstruction of coronary vessels (depending on the presence and course of those vessels). This patient featured an aberrant coronary pathway; the anatomical model afforded the surgeons the patient-matched information prior to opening the patient.

The positive response to the anatomical model was not unique. The perceived improvement in spatial acuity also facilitated improved patient-matched surgical plans:“[The anatomical model] helped delineate all anatomic relationships and specifically the pulmonary veins which were difficult to see on echo. The model was also useful to determine where we would place the Glenn/how to perform the surgery.”

“[The anatomical model] helped delineate all anatomic relationships and specifically the pulmonary veins which were difficult to see on echo. The model was also useful to determine where we would place the Glenn/how to perform the surgery.”

This response not only shows the improved understanding of the spatial relationships, but also specifically points to deficiencies in other imaging modalities. Specifically, the anatomical model revealed structures unseen in the echo due to the patient’s diminutive size and low pulmonary blood flow. In addition, the improved understanding between the superior vena cava and the pulmonary artery is essential for the Glenn procedure; the model anecdotally facilitated planning. These vignettes illustrate the perceived benefits of the anatomical models due to their capability of representation morphologically complex disease lesions. Similar examples of morphologically complex lesions such as double outlet right ventricle are found in contemporary literature .

The anatomical models measured effects on planning (the ANOVA tables) and surgeon intention (the anecdotal vignettes) illustrate the role the anatomical model had in establishing the surgeons’ spatial understanding of the patient’s anatomy by presenting an accurate, absolute-scale reference for the specific patient. In addition, the use of anatomical model potentially reduces surgical and operating room length of time for complex surgeries. Morbidity and mortality are suggested to be linked to these time metric , a reduction of these times due to effective planning may possible with anatomical models. While the ANOVA tables and associated TAM vignettes demonstrate the efficacy of the anatomical model, the process and final model have limitations.

Limitations

This study is a retrospective review, not a clinical trial, as such there were limitations in the methodology for minimizing confounding factors. Patient inclusion/exclusion criteria, imaging protocol, and surgeons all provide numerous avenues for confounding data analyses and limiting bias. These limitations are well described in literature relating to studies and trials; the effect of these limitations will be described .

The initial barrier encountered is common to many pilot/early studies: limited sample size. Initially, the study pool started at 79 cases; however, this patient population spanned complexity of disease lesions. Comparing complex lesions to comparatively simple lesions with regards to patient outcomes would not likely yield compelling analyses or worthwhile discussion. An early decision was to limit the study population to complex lesions (n = 33) for later ANOVA analyses. In addition, the method of analysis compared time-based metrics between surgeries planned with anatomical model and standard-of-care procedures. The analyses were further blocked by diagnoses; however, this blocking does not account for other lesion complexity factors such as syndromes, additional congenital defects, or prior surgeries. To limit biases related to these potentially confounding factors, a study would need a much more-narrow scope for disease lesion and surgical repair or a much greater patient population to facilitate more meaningful blocking. Neither solution was pragmatic for this retrospective study; however, it may be utilized for planning a prospective clinical trial. Even with these further limitations/blocking in a prospective study design, any study on anatomical models would be challenged by remaining, uncontrolled nuisance factors.

As for the TAM study, the two participating cardiothoracic surgeons, while not principal investigators, were aware that the intent of the study: understanding the impact of anatomical models on surgical outcomes; therefore, a detection bias may have been present . A detection bias can occur when the recording of an outcome is subconsciously affected by the participants’ preconceptions. Post-surgical responses are an observation of the surgical planning process after the completion of a surgery. Observations made in this manner may also yield the detection bias as the surgeon may subconsciously be looking for additional benefits of the anatomical model or disassociating adverse surgical events from the anatomical model. Evidence of this bias may be present in the 100% positive response rate to the anatomical models perceived efficacy. Without a larger sample size and stricter inclusion protocols, the potential for detection bias is difficult to control. A multi-site study with pre-, peri-, and post-surgical assessments could further limit the detection bias while also revealing more of the habits-of-mind behind surgeon interaction with an anatomical model.

Future direction

A multi-center clinical trial was formulated based in part on the data presented in this publication. 3D Hearts Enabling a Randomized Trial (3DHEART) is a trial to gauge the efficacy of anatomical models in reducing cardiopulmonary bypass time (primary endpoint) in addition to over 20 secondary patient outcome endpoints. The data in this manuscript assisted in defining the inclusion criteria as only patients with DORV-, D-TGA-, and truncus-type anatomy.
