
Abstract

3D printing technology has allowed the creation of custom applicators for high dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy, especially for complex anatomy. With conformal therapy comes the need for advanced dosimetric verification. It is important to demonstrate how dose to 3D printed materials can be related to dose to water. This study aimed to determine dose differences and uncertainties using 3D printed PLA and ABS plastics for Radiochromic film calibration in HDR brachytherapy.

Gafchromic EBT3 film pieces were irradiated in water with an Ir-192 source at calculated dose levels ranging from 0 to 800 cGy, to create the control calibration curve. Similarly, film was placed below 3D printed PLA and ABS blocks and irradiated at the same dose levels calculated for water, ranging from 0 to 800 cGy. After a 72-h development time, film pieces were scanned on a flatbed scanner and the median pixel value was recorded in the region of highest dose. This value was converted to net optical density (NOD). A rational function was used to fit a calibration curve in water that relates NOD to dose for red, green, and blue color channels. Based on this fitted curve, ABS and PLA NOD values were used to estimate dose in 3D printed plastics.

From the fitted calibration curve, mean residual error between measured and planned dose to water was less than 1% for each color channel at high dose levels. At high dose levels, ABS and PLA mean residual errors were about 6.9 and 7.8% in the red channel, while 5.2 and 5.7% in the green channel. Combined uncertainties measured to be about 6.9% at high dose levels. This study demonstrated dose differences and uncertainties using 3D printed applicators for HDR Ir-192 brachytherapy.



Introduction

Custom applicators are useful for treating superficial tumors with high dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy. They allow highly conformal dose delivery, and are especially beneficial for oblique surfaces, such as the face . The Freiburg Flap is a commonly used customizable applicator for treating cutaneous lesions at depths less than 5 mm3. While this applicator is useful for treating lesions located on relatively uniform surfaces, it has difficulty conforming to irregularly-shaped structures such as the nose or ear. Recently, the proliferation of 3D printing technology has enabled the creation of customized applicators for the delivery of highly conformal radiotherapy treatment, even in the setting of complex anatomic geometries .

With advancement of applicators and conformal therapy comes the need for accurate dosimetry methods. Film dosimetry has proved to be a high-resolution tool for radiotherapy treatment verification. Radiochromic film is useful for HDR brachytherapy quality assurance and is more practical than use of radiographic film or ion chambers .

Radiochromic film darkens with radiation exposure and dose, measured by changes in optical density without the need for chemical processing. Radiochromic film dosimetry allows the conversion of net optical density (NOD) to dose based on a source-specific calibration curve in water, or solid water . To create a calibration curve, film is exposed in water at increasing prescribed dose levels. Film response (darkening) is measured in a standard flatbed scanner as NOD. The NOD can be related to dose by a rational function. This fitted function, known as a calibration curve, can then be used as a dosimetry tool for future dose measurements made with Radiochromic film.

Common 3D printed plastics such as acrylic butadiene styrene (ABS) and polymethylmethacrylate (PLA) have been shown to be near-water equivalent . Currently, film calibration for the HDR source is done in water. The process of film calibration in water can be laborious and time consuming. In a busy clinical setting, the use of 3D printed PLA and ABS plastics could offer a faster alternative for obtaining film calibration curves. The goal of this work was to obtain the relationship of doses and uncertainties in 3D printed PLA and ABS plastics when used in lieu of water for film calibration for HDR Iridium-192 brachytherapy sources. Furthermore, as part of a large-scale study to design custom 3D-printed superficial HDR applicators, it is important to demonstrate how dose in 3D printed materials can be related to dose to water.


