
Abstract

Extensive use of nanomaterials in consumer products has invoked the concerns about interactions of nanoparticles with living organisms (including microorganisms). Zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) are well known for their antibacterial effect due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Therefore, their release into the environment is expected to raise major concern towards ecotoxicity. In the present study, we have studied the toxic effect of ZnO NPs on Deinococcus radiodurans, which is well known to show extraordinary resistant from the damaging effects of radiation. Result showed that ZnO NPs are significantly internalized into the bacterial cells and induce concentration-dependent toxicity with membrane damage. Genotoxicity studies revealed that ZnO exposure induces significant DNA damage to bacterial cells. All the observations evidenced that ZnO NPs induce significant ROS generation, protein oxidation and DNA damage with concomitant thiol depletion. Further, gene expression analysis showed that several DNA repair genes and metabolic pathway-related genes are downregulated upon ZnO NP exposure, with simultaneous increase in the expression of DNA damage response genes. Thus, the present study on toxicity of ZnO NPs on a model organism, D. radiodurans, inflicts the possible mechanism behind ZnO NP-mediated toxic effects on various other microbial organisms.



Introduction

Recently, nanoparticles (NPs) have gained significant attention in industrial applications due to their unique optical, electronic, mechanical, and magnetic properties. These properties mainly depend on the shape, size, and composition of NPs which further lead to the high surface-to-volume ratio and surface reactivity (Bradford et al. 2009). NPs such as zinc oxide (ZnO), titanium dioxide (TiO2), manganese oxide (MnO) and silver NPs (AgNPs) are used in various personal care and food products, sunscreens, plastic paints, gas sensors, textiles, solar cells, treatment of waste water and as an antibacterial agent (Oberdorster et al. 2005; Sheela et al. 2012; Srivastava et al. 2013; Memon et al. 2018; Memon et al. 2015; Y Liu et al. 2015). Despite their beneficial aspects, harmful effects of NPs over human health and environment remain one of the major bottlenecks towards implementation of their real potential. Release of NPs in air, water, and landfills has been reported to cause adverse effects on environmental and human health (Daughton and Ternes 1999; Memon et al. 2015). In context to environment, risk assessment of NPs must also be performed after their release into the environment i.e. mobility, reactivity and their effect on microorganisms (Simon-Deckers et al. 2009). The release of NPs in the environment is expected to cause adverse effects over the microbes and other organisms.

Zinc, due to its antibacterial property, can effectively be utilized in the commercial products like ointments, creams, lotions, and toothpastes. ZnO is generally considered as low toxic, but its nanoparticle form is highly reactive and responsive with high absorptivity (Almoudi et al. 2018). Due to the unique piezoelectric, magnetic and optical properties, ZnO NPs have received tremendous attention and applied in many aspects of food and agriculture system (Emami-Karvani and Chehrazi 2011; Newton and Warburton 2007). Antibacterial aspects of ZnO NPs are mainly due to the membrane disruption (Brayner et al. 2006) or induction of intracellular ROS in bacterial cells (Jones et al. 2008). Jiang et al. demonstrated that in the presence of radical scavenger, bactericidal effect of ZnO NPs can be suppressed, which gives direct evidence of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated antibacterial effect of ZnO NPs (Jiang et al. 2016). Release of Zn2+ in bacterial culture medium is also proposed to be one of the major mechanisms of antibacterial activity of ZnO NPs. It has also been reported that upon activation by ultraviolet (UV) and visible lights, ZnO NPs generate various harmful radicals such as hydroxyl radical, superoxide radical and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Due to the negative charge hydroxyl radical and superoxides are unable to penetrate the bacterial membrane, whereas, H2O2 can cross the cell membrane efficiently (Padmavathy and Vijayaraghavan 2008). ZnO NPs are reported to possess bactericidal effect on Campylobacter jejuni, a food-borne pathogen, by disrupting the cellular membrane and inducing oxidative stress in bacterial cells (Xie et al. 2011).

Despite its extensive antibacterial activity, use of ZnO NPs is limited due to its toxicological impact on human body. Exposure of ZnO NPs was reported to induce significant cytotoxic effect and DNA damage in cells. Reports have also shown that ZnO NPs can be accumulated in mouse liver and induces cellular injury. ZnO toxicological data obtained so far are inconsistent and conflicting. No reports are available which can clearly suggest actual concentration of ZnO NPs which can be harmful to human body (Almoudi et al. 2018).

There have been several strategies to reduce the toxic effect of ZnO NPs but keeping the antimicrobial effect intact. In one of the cases, coating of ZnO NPs with biocompatible molecule, poly-(N-isopropylacrylamide), exhibited antimicrobial activity at lower concentration (1.33 mM) without any appreciable toxicity to mammalian cells. Additionally, chitosan-ZnO bands was successfully utilized for the wound treatment in mice, infected with P. aeruginosa, S. intermedicus, and S. hyicus (Siddiqi et al. 2018). ZnO NPs coated with various polymers such as poly (hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV), poly (lactic acid) (PLA) or poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) are also reported to be utilized as antibacterial food packaging materials (Ogunsona et al. 2019). Although all the studies of NPs have focused towards their effect on normal bacterial species, however, the effect of NPs over a resistant strain of bacteria has not been explored in great detail. In this context, we have chosen a stress-resistant bacteria Deinococcus radiodurans and studied the toxicity mechanism of ZnO NPs. Deinococcus radiodurans possesses unique and extraordinary resistance against UV radiation, desiccation, gamma radiation and mitomycin C exposure, due to their accurate and strong DNA repair mechanism and protection of proteins from oxidative damage and manganese complex (Slade and Radman 2011) (Daly et al. 2010). Enzymatic and non-enzymatic small molecule-based antioxidants are also some of the major factors for their exceptional protection property against oxidative stress (Slade and Radman 2011; Anaganti et al. 2015). So far, no comprehensive studies are made to illustrate the impact of nanomaterials (NMs) on the D. radiodurans. Several reports demonstrated the oxidative stress-mediated toxicity of ZnO NPs over several gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial strains (Emami-Karvani and Chehrazi 2011). Therefore, it was of considerable importance to explore the cell viability and oxidative stress levels upon ZnO NPs exposure in bacterial strain capable of withstanding the effects of radiation and free radicals. The chosen experimental model, D. radiodurans, was an appropriate organism for such studies as it will help to discover the toxic potential of ZnO NPs as well as novel DNA repair pathways which can be activated in response to ZnO NP-mediated DNA damage.


