
Abstract

The mycelium of Lentinula edodes produces enzymes which may degrade xenobiotics including steroid hormones. The aim of the study was to determine whether the mycelium from in vitro cultures of L. edodes are able to degrade endocrine disruptors such as testosterone and 17α-ethynylestradiol. To prove the possibility of xenobiotics degradation, cultures of L. edodes were cultivated in an Oddoux liquid medium with the addition of synthetic 17α-ethynylestradiol and synthetic testosterone. The endocrine disruptors were extracted from the mycelium and determined qualitatively by RP-HPLC. The degradation products of testosterone and 17α-ethynylestradiol were identified using a UPLC/MS/MS analysis. Undegraded testosterone was determined at the amount of 2.97 mg/g dry weight but only in one of the L. edodes extracts from in vitro cultures supplemented with 50 mg of this compound. In turn, 17α-ethynylestradiol was not determined in any samples. Additionally in all extracts, mushroom sterols (ergosterol peroxide and ergosterol) were determined. Their total amounts were significantly lower in samples containing the abovementioned steroids than in extracts from mycelium L. edodes without the addition of steroid hormones. The results demonstrated that the mycelium of L. edodes can be used in the biodegradation process of a water environment contaminated with endocrine disruptors.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-018-1458-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Environmental pollution with xenobiotics (including steroid hormones) has become a serious problem on a global scale. This problem could be solved using white rot fungi (WRF), represented by Lentinula edodes. The species has been extensively studied, because its fruiting bodies contain compounds exhibiting anticancer, antioxidant, and antimicrobial effects (Braga 2011; Mleczek et al. 2017; Muszyńska et al. 2017).

Moreover, the mycelium of L. edodes produces enzymes with oxidative effects, which may degrade xenobiotics (Kryczyk et al. 2017). White rot mushrooms can transform durable contaminants such as polycyclic aromatic carbohydrates (Lang et al. 1995). These properties can also be used to treat soil contaminated with petroleum. WRF are also efficient in the biodegradation of soils contaminated especially with heavy metals, owing to their capacity to accumulate such metals in the fruiting bodies (Cerniglia et al. 1992; Lang et al. 1995). The efficiency of mushrooms in biodegradation processes is further caused by their rapid growth, production of large amounts of biomass and the widespread occurrence of hyphae in the soil (Ashoka et al. 2002; Wong 2009).

The most important mechanism for the decomposition of xenobiotics by mushroom enzymes is related to the decomposition of lignin. Extracellular enzymes modifying lignin possess low substrate specificity; thus, they can decompose large amounts of highly resistant organic contaminants with a structure similar to that of lignin (Dąbrowska et al. 2018; Mansur et al. 2003). The major enzymes of the lignin degradation system are lignin peroxidase, laccase, manganese-dependent peroxidase, and enzymes producing H2O2, although not all ligninolytic fungi synthesize them to the same degree (Hofrichter 2002; Kirk and Farrell 1987). Mushroom laccase has been proved able to degrade many pharmaceuticals (for example: naproxen, ketoprofen, diclofenac) (Taheran et al. 2016).

There are numerous sources of environmental contamination by endocrine disruptors. In stock breeding, steroid hormones are used to increase feeding and muscle growth efficiency. The so-called concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs) pose a risk to the environment. The feed used in this animal feeding method contains synthetic steroids, which are excreted with their excrements and then leached into water, including groundwater (Anderson et al. 2012). Estrogen has been determined in the excrements and the solid waste of animals and in fertilizers used directly on arable fields (Biswas et al. 2013). Livestock excrements are probably the greatest source of estrogen in the environment. Based on the literature data, pregnant women excrete 260–790 and 280–600 µg/day of estrone and estradiol, respectively. These values are considerably higher than in the case of postmenopausal women treated with hormone replacement therapy (HRT) (Hotchkiss et al. 2008). Additionally, steroid hormones are currently overused by a large group of persons to build their muscle mass. Moreover, hospitals constitute another source of estrogen contamination. Several experiments have corroborated the fact that estrogen, with particularly high levels of estriol, has been determined in samples of hospital sewage (Arnold et al. 2014; Avberšek et al. 2011).

These hormones may contribute to the development of cardiovascular diseases and even cancers (Ibarluzea et al. 2004; Liang and Shan 2013; Moore et al. 2016; Salla et al. 2016). Unfortunately, municipal water treatment plants are not efficient in the removal of steroid hormones from wastewater, thus allowing them to be directly released into the environment (Andaluri et al. 2013; El Osta et al. 2016; Hotchkiss et al. 2008). Removal of endocrine disrupting compounds with WRF was reported (Cruz-Morató et al. 2014).

Therefore, the search for a safe and efficient agent for biodegradation has emerged as an important task. The present study is aimed at the determination (with the use of analytical methods such as RP-HPLC chromatography) of whether L. edodes, degrades endocrine disruptors such as 17α-ethynylestradiol and testosterone under in vitro culture conditions.

The degradation products of testosterone and 17α-ethynylestradiol were identified using an UPLC/MS analysis and fragmentation patterns obtained from MS/MS experiments.


