
Abstract

Nonlinear mixed effects models are widely used to describe longitudinal data to improve the efficiency of drug development process or increase the understanding of the studied disease. In such settings, the appropriateness of the modeling assumptions is critical in order to draw correct conclusions and must be carefully assessed for any substantial violations. Here, we propose a new method for structure model assessment, based on assessment of bias in conditional weighted residuals (CWRES). We illustrate this method by assessing prediction bias in two integrated models for glucose homeostasis, the integrated glucose-insulin (IGI) model, and the integrated minimal model (IMM). One dataset was simulated from each model then analyzed with the two models. CWRES outputted from each model fitting were modeled to capture systematic trends in CWRES as well as the magnitude of structural model misspecifications in terms of difference in objective function values (ΔOFVBias). The estimates of CWRES bias were used to calculate the corresponding bias in conditional predictions by the inversion of first-order conditional estimation method’s covariance equation. Time, glucose, and insulin concentration predictions were the investigated independent variables. The new method identified correctly the bias in glucose sub-model of the integrated minimal model (IMM), when this bias occurred, and calculated the absolute and proportional magnitude of the resulting bias. CWRES bias versus the independent variables agreed well with the true trends of misspecification. This method is fast easily automated diagnostic tool for model development/evaluation process, and it is already implemented as part of the Perl-speaks-NONMEM software.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0305-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Nonlinear mixed effects (NLME) models are currently advocated to maximize the utilization of gained information throughout all the phases of drug development. These models are adopted for reducing sample size, calculating study power, confirming drug effects, selecting doses, and optimizing trial design as well as supporting final/interim analysis decisions. In such settings, the appropriateness of the modeling assumptions is critical in order to draw correct conclusions and the assumptions must be carefully assessed for any substantial violations. Usually, modeling assumptions are assessed from the available knowledge on physiological processes that are to be modeled. However, model misspecifications can occur when the incompatibility of a modeling assumption with the underlying system goes undetected/untested, even though the model appears to give an accurate description of the data.

Different numerical and visual techniques had been proposed as reliable model evaluation methods. Numerical diagnostics include assessment of parameters uncertainty, conditional weighted residuals (CWRES), normalized prediction distribution errors (NPDE), posterior predictive checks (PPC), and numerical predictive checks. Visual diagnostics based on model predictions include scatterplots of observed versus predicted and residuals versus predicted, while simulation-based diagnostics include visual predictive checks and the graphical versions of NPDE and PPC. The pros and cons of these techniques had been thoroughly discussed by Nguyen et al. where it was clear that even though graphical tools can signal where the model fails to describe the data, none of them can quantify this model misspecification or the gain in goodness of fit upon correction.

Lately, a new diagnostic tool based on residual modeling has been proposed as an easy and fast automated tool for model development/evaluation process. Residual modeling showed the superiority of CWRES over other residuals, where CWRES modeling provided guidance for where a potential model misspecification occurred, similar to other visual diagnostics. In addition, it uniquely identified the nature and quantified the magnitude of this misspecifications in terms of objective function value (OFV). In this work, we present a new method based on CWRES modeling to assess structural assumptions as prediction bias in NLME models developed for continuous data, by back-extrapolating a CWRES-based bias using the first-order conditional estimation (FOCE) approximation. First, we introduce CWRES bias calculation, then we derive predication-bias correction based on the calculated CWRES bias. Afterwards, we illustrate the practical use of this method by assessing prediction bias in two integrated NLME models for glucose homeostasis, the integrated glucose-insulin (IGI) model and the integrated minimal model (IMM). Both models consist of glucose and insulin sub-models with interconnecting control mechanisms, and were proposed to describe simultaneously the glucose-insulin regulation system following intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT) in healthy subjects.


