
Abstract

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung disease with approximately 174 million cases worldwide. Electronic questionnaires are increasingly used for collecting patient-reported-outcome (PRO) data about disease symptoms. Our aim was to leverage PRO data, collected to record COPD disease symptoms, in a general modelling framework to enable interpretation of PRO observations in relation to disease progression and potential to predict exacerbations. The data were collected daily over a year, in a prospective, observational study. The e-questionnaire, the EXAcerbations of COPD Tool (EXACT®) included 14 items (i.e. questions) with 4 or 5 ordered categorical response options. An item response theory (IRT) model was used to relate the responses from each item to the underlying latent variable (which we refer to as disease severity), and on each item level, Markov models (MM) with 4 or 5 categories were applied to describe the dependence between consecutive observations. Minimal continuous time MMs were used and parameterised using ordinary differential equations. One hundred twenty-seven COPD patients were included (median age 67 years, 54% male, 39% current smokers), providing approximately 40,000 observations per EXACT® item. The final model suggested that, with time, patients more often reported the same scores as the previous day, i.e. the scores were more stable. The modelled COPD disease severity change over time varied markedly between subjects, but was small in the typical individual. This is the first IRT model with Markovian properties; our analysis proved them necessary for predicting symptom-defined exacerbations.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0319-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an inflammatory disease of the lung, characterised by airflow obstruction that progresses with time. The most important risk factor associated with COPD is considered smoking, but risk factors also include other exposures (e.g. air pollution, occupational dusts and chemicals) and host factors, such as α1-antitrypsin deficiency. COPD is associated with emphysema and mucus hypersecretion, and its progression is punctuated with acute periods of a temporary increase in symptoms, also called exacerbations.Historically, exacerbations are defined by a clinic visit or hospitalisation with medical treatment (clinically confirmed); however, recently, questionnaires have been validated as useful for symptom-defined exacerbations (4–6). Exacerbations contribute to an accelerated decline of pulmonary function, higher risk of cardiovascular events and worse quality of life and are a major cause of COPD-related hospital admissions, morbidity and mortality; therefore, also increasing healthcare costs. Approximately 174 million people had COPD in 2015, and around three million die from it every year. The disease burden of COPD is third worldwide, but may even increase in the future, due to an ageing society.

For slowly progressing diseases, such as COPD, clinical trials that investigate symptom-based exacerbations and/or disease progression are often relatively long (e.g. a year, or more), making collection of multiple observations possible. Modelling techniques facilitate using all the information from the repeated measurements and can therefore provide additional insight over and above the output from traditional statistical methods, where typically only end-of-treatment information is used. Such longitudinal analysis has the advantage of quantifying any trend in response and may therefore be helpful in describing and predicting future exacerbations, which may be especially useful in early clinical trials. Most models published so far are either Markov models, focusing on the cost-effectiveness of the COPD treatment intervention (13–17), or logistic regression models, predicting the probability of exacerbation within the next 24 months or COPD-patient hospital admissions. Some linear and non-linear regression models were also developed, aiming to predict disease progression (20–22). To our knowledge, none of the models published so far described the longitudinal COPD progression using daily patient-reported-outcome (PRO) data, which might be able to reflect symptoms earlier than, for example, clinicians’ reports. A model that would use daily PRO data in its entirety to predict changes in patient disease severity would therefore be valuable in assessing disease progression.

PRO data generally reflect health status reports that come directly from the patient and are being increasingly used to inform clinical decisions and assess improvements in a patient’s health status, and also in drug development (23–25). The standard method for analysing longitudinal PRO data from questionnaires is the total instrument score, calculated from the individual item scores; hence, a single continuous variable is analysed. An alternative approach is to use PRO data in its entirety by developing a longitudinal mixed-effects item response theory (IRT) model, where the contribution of each individual item score is modelled separately over time, but related to a common underlying hypothetical latent variable (i.e. in IRT terminology and hereafter referred to as ‘disease severity’), which varies between individuals and over time. This can help one understand change in disease severity over time (i.e. symptom-based disease progression), particularly in early clinical development. Furthermore, as each individual item score is modelled separately giving rise to a unique ‘item characteristic curve’ (ICC), IRT modelling can provide knowledge on the item that is most informative for a population with a certain disease severity, which can be valuable information for clinicians applying the questionnaire.

Frequent observations of categorical data make the presence of the Markovian elements, typically identified as many consecutive same-item-score observations, likely. With daily data collection in studies, through the use of electronic devices, such correlations are likely to be manifested. In previously published implementations (28–35), IRT models assume independence under the structural model. This means that the probability distribution of outcomes are driven by the latent variable, and the ICCs only and observations, even when close to each other in time, are independent realisations. This is found often to not be the case with subjective scoring, and models to account for the dependence between consecutive observations in the data would be valuable.

In the present work, we analysed the PRO data, collected in the Acute Exacerbation and Respiratory InfectionS in COPD (AERIS) study, using the EXAcerbations of COPD Tool (EXACT®), with two aims: (i) to create a model that can be useful as a basis for assessing disease progression including predictions of symptom-defined exacerbations and effect of treatment on these clinical trials, and (ii) to extend the IRT modelling methodology to incorporate the situation where underlying data display Markovian features.



DISCUSSION

A combination of an item response theory model and 14 item-specific longitudinal Markov models was successfully developed for the first time to our knowledge. This integrated modelling approach proved to be able to describe frequently collected and therefore correlated composite score data, as was exemplified here using daily EXACT® patient reported outcome data from patients with COPD receiving standard of care only.

The importance of developing a model, where IRT is used together with the longitudinal Markov elements, is twofold. Firstly, using the IRT methodology has several advantages over the total-score approach. For example, as it uses all individual item scores and not just a total score, it prevents information loss, which might otherwise result in model misspecification. Additionally, it does not ignore the categorical nature of the data, which occurs when modelling the total score as a single continuous variable. Secondly, by including the longitudinal Markov elements (on an item level), the developed model also provides a way to describe the dependence between frequently collected longitudinal data such as those obtained nowadays from patient-reported diaries which are now filled in at home, using an electronic device.

The mean equilibrium time was estimated longer than a day (1.2 days at start of the study, and 5.1 days at the end of the study, Table S2), and a clear misfit of the model without the Markov elements was observed (Fig. 8, Fig. S1), which both confirmed that the addition of the Markov elements was needed. The values of the MET parameter estimates also show that the variability in patients reporting outcomes was decreasing with time on study, since a higher MET value indicates fewer transitions, i.e. more stable scores. This might be because when a patient is recruited to a study, they might be more compliant with their medications and have more healthcare interactions.

The graphical evaluation of the model showed that the final model can describe the data adequately. More specifically, the model was able to describe the proportions of item-scores (Fig. 2 and Fig. S3a-d), the proportions of transitions between previous and current item-scores (Fig. 3), and also the total scores (Fig. 4). There were some underpredictions in the situation when an item score would not change from 1 (Fig. 2), and also in the median total scores (Fig. 4); however, these misspecifications were not that apparent, with the model adequately capturing the time trends and the 95% prediction intervals, and none of the additional changes to the model that were tested provided an improvement.

When correlations between items were investigated, it was confirmed that the grouping of the items in the COPD disease domains (as captured in the EXACT® questionnaire) was appropriate, since the correlation between items 1, 5 and 6; items 7 and 11; and items 2 and 3 (belonging to the chest domain, breathlessness domain and cough and sputum domain, respectively, Table I) were much stronger than between other items (Fig. 5). Additionally, although not belonging to the same domain, items 12 and 13 also showed to be correlated, which can be expected, given their description—i.e. ‘Tired or weak’, and ‘Disturbed sleep’, respectively (Table I). Since there were items belonging to obvious domains, one could argue that several latent variables should be included in the model; however, in our example, this was not possible due to too few items belonging to separate domains.

Since visual diagnostics confirmed that the model could describe the data satisfactorily, i.e. there were no major misspecifications, further potential improvements to the model were not investigated. For example, we used minimal Markov models, meaning that the MET was assumed to not differ between compartments, and a dropout model was also not investigated. Additionally, we did not evaluate any of the available covariates in this work, nevertheless, the model was able to describe the data when stratified by gender (Fig. S4) and also when plotted against age (Fig. S5), indicating that these covariates might not provide an improvement to the fit. Another potential limitation might be that we did not have information on whether the patients were at any time admitted to a hospital and treated with another drug (not standard of care), which may affect their disease progression.

In our model, continuous time Markov models were used, where, in contrast with discrete time Markov models, the probability of transition can change according to the time difference between two consecutive observations. Therefore, if a subject had missing observations for a study day, this did not affect the fit.

When the final model’s ability to predict symptom-defined exacerbations was tested, the model could predict the general trend of the cumulative proportions of the subjects with an exacerbation; however, some overprediction was observed when the study day was greater than approximately 180 days (Fig. 8), which might be due to fewer study participants continuing to report their symptoms. However, the model with the same structure without the Markov elements greatly underpredicted the symptom-defined exacerbations even from the beginning of the study. The poor performance of the model to predict symptom-defined exacerbations without the Markov elements can be understood from the definition of such exacerbation, i.e. the total score had to be increased for at least two or three consecutive days. As the variability in transitions between scores was exaggerated in the model without the Markov elements (Fig. S1), a stable increase in a score did not occur; hence, a symptom-defined exacerbation was not defined.

Future work could include adding a treatment effect to the model, and although the model was developed using EXACT® data, it could also be applied to daily data from other questionnaires. With a treatment effect added to the model, the model could be utilised for simulation of study designs in terms of evaluating treatment effects, sample size and duration. Additionally, the effect of patients’ characteristics on response over time, especially important in early drug development, could also be investigated and perhaps help shorten proof-of-concept studies.
