




Discussion

Accurate segmentation of desired anatomy from imaging data for the purposes of 3D printing requires using a combination and variety of software tools . All three of the most common semi-automated segmentation tools, global thresholding, edge detection, and region growing, rely on voxel Hounsfield Unit values to differentiate between different tissues and surrounding anatomical structures . Even manual segmentation tools such as cropping and sculpting count on visual acuity to see the greyscale differences between the target anatomy. SDCT provides both conventional and VMI data with a significant difference in Hounsfield Unit values which aids in the automatic and manual segmentation workflow. While other advanced pixel-based software algorithms that do not completely rely on tissue density may be helpful in certain case scenarios, these tools may not be universally applicable to all cases. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no previously published work associating spectral detector computed tomography and medical 3D printing applications.

In all the cases described above, the segmentation process using VMI data was qualitatively reported as easier, faster, and increased the operator’s confidence in obtaining accurate anatomy. Case 4 also demonstrated how imaging artifacts could be reduced on SDCT enabling segmentation and 3D printing from otherwise unsalvageable imaging sources [13–15]. The single segmentation operator commented that without the VMI data in each of the four detailed cases, the requested segmentation may not have been possible and would have resulted in either time-prohibiting manual segmentation or rescanning the desired patient anatomy.

Since the SDCT VMI data is automatically acquired with every scan without requiring an additional protocol selection or intervention, the VMI data is available to aid in segmentation any time after the image acquisition. This key factor is what enabled our team to retrospectively review any case completed on the SDCT for VMI segmentation. The only workflow change is prospectively requesting any clinical 3D printing cases to have their imaging acquired on the SDCT which we have done in our practice setting.

Due to the complexities of the SDCT and VMI data along with the limited institutional resources, we were able to recruit only one senior person for segmentation of the cases with the knowledgebase and software skills required. One of the primary goals of this project was to establish the concept and workflow for integrating dual-energy CT VMI data into medical 3D printing segmentation. Future directions for this project include training and recruiting additional persons for segmentation to formally quantify and evaluate variability in the segmentation process between multiple persons.

One of the limitations of this workflow is that the VMI data is optimized for use in Philips Intellispace Portal 9.0. The 3D segmentation tools in Philips ISP are robust and the ability to use a slider/toggle to dynamically switch between different keV settings is extremely helpful for both automatic and manual segmentation. However, if the workflow requires utilization of different or more advanced segmentation software, the VMI DICOM data must be post-processed and exported individually at each desired keV value (40 keV DICOM dataset, 60 keV DICOM dataset, etc.). Future software advancements to integrate VMI data natively in other platforms would be ideal and allow for greater flexibility in utilizing spectral data on multiple platforms.
