
Abstract

microRNAs (miRNAs) are highly conserved, short (~ 21-nucleotide), endogenous, non-coding RNA molecules that play major roles in post-transcriptional silencing by guiding target mRNA cleavage or translational inhibition. In this study, applying high-stringent genome-wide computational-based approaches, a total of 28 putative miRNAs belonging to 17 miRNA families were identified from an antioxidant-rich medicinal plant passion fruit (Passiflora edulis). Inter-tissue (leaves and fruits) and inter-varietal (yellow and purple fruit varieties) quantitative study of six putative passion fruit miRNAs (ped-miR160, ped-miR164, ped-miR166, ped-miR393, ped-miR394, and ped-miR398) showed differential expression. Using psRNATarget tool, a total of 25 potential target proteins of the characterized passion fruit miRNAs were also identified. Most of the target proteins identified in this study, including SQUAMOSA promoter binding, Class III HD-Zip, NAC, Scarecrow, APETALA2, Auxin response factor, MYB, and superoxide dismutase, were found to be involved in development, metabolism, and defense/stress response signaling.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-019-2000-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

microRNAs (miRNAs) are small (~ 21-nucleotide) non-coding endogenous RNA molecules that play a vital post-transcriptional regulatory role in gene expression by target mRNA cleavage or translational inhibition (Jones-Rhoades et al. 2006). In plant, mature miRNAs are generated from the long stem-loop primary transcript (pre-miRNA) by a dicer-like RNA endonuclease via the intermediate step of pre-miRNA synthesis, and finally the RNA inducing silencing complex (RISC) guided by ARGONAUTE 1 (AGO1) protein directs the miRNA to the complementary target mRNA sequence (Voinnet 2009). Plant microRNAs are reported to possess important functions in several metabolic and biological pathways such as tissue development and differentiation, biotic and abiotic stress responses, phytohormones signaling, and secondary metabolite production (Wu 2013; Rajwanshi et al. 2014; Paul et al. 2011, 2017, 2018; Sharma et al. 2019; Gupta et al. 2017). Nonetheless, the evolutionary highly conserved nature of an extensive number of miRNAs simplified the process of characterization of novel miRNA orthologs in new plant species through homologs identification (Zhang et al. 2006b; Ye et al. 2013; Sharma et al. 2019). However, only the computational-based homology approach for the identification of miRNAs in new plant species can generate false-positive results, and hence several other parameters such as length, minimum free energy (MFE), and the minimum folding free energy index (MFEI) of the pre-miRNAs need to be studied to increase the precision of the prediction (Paul et al. 2018; Sharma et al. 2019). Moreover, experimental validation of the predicted miRNAs is highly recommended (Sharma et al. 2019).

Passiflora edulis, commonly known as passion fruit is a flowering vine native to Brazil and cultivated worldwide with distinctive aromas and flavors making it a popular additive to many tropical fruit juice blends (Talcott et al. 2003). The most common varieties of this fruit are with yellow (P. edulis var flavicarpa) and purple (P. edulis var edulis) skin (Xiaojing and Liuxin 1994). Both the varieties contain a yellow soft pulp and lots of seeds inside a hard rind (Supplementary file 1) (López-Vargas et al. 2013). The characteristic color of yellow passion fruit is due to provitamin A carotenes and xanthophylls, while the anthocyanins contribute to the spectacular deep purple color to the purple variety (Talcott et al. 2003). Because of their acidic flavor and higher juice yield, yellow passion fruits are most widely used for processed juices, while due to their sweeter taste, purple varieties are typically consumed fresh (Talcott et al. 2003). Passion fruit has recently gained a lot of attention worldwide due to it being a rich source of powerful antioxidants as well as for showing anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-diabetic, anti-hypertension, and anti-aging properties (Vera et al. 2019; Ayala-Zavala et al. 2011). On the other hand, the peel of passion fruit contains saponin, triterpenoid, flavonoids, and phenolic compounds that can help to inhibit elastase activity facilitating the production of anti-wrinkle cosmetic cream (Vera et al. 2019). Typical phytochemicals found in passion fruit are passiflorine, harmine, harman, harmol, and harmaline (Pereira et al. 2014). Moreover, the leaves of passion fruit also contain several flavonoids such as isoorientin, isovitexin, and vitexin which have been employed in several European and American countries as sedatives and anti-inflammatory agents (Ferreres et al. 2007). Despite the fact that miRNAs regulate several metabolic processes in plants, none of the miRNA-related studies have been performed so far in passion fruit, and none are listed in the miRBase. It has been confirmed that several conserved, as well as species-specific miRNAs, are very important for plants in different biological processes and hence, profiling miRNAs in a non-model plant is essential to understand the regulation of various biological phenomena. With the recent draft genome sequence available (Wu et al. 2019), the current study offers an insight of miRNAs and their respective targets in passion fruit using bioinformatics as well as wet-lab approach for better understanding the physiological processes in this plant. In summary, in this study for the first time, we have generated the miRNA and respective target profile of passion fruit and performed a comparative miRNA expression study between vegetative and reproductive tissues (leaves and fruits) as well as between two different varieties (yellow and purple skins).


