
Abstract

Primers having suboptimal amplification efficiencies were shown to falsely represent fold change expression of the N-methyltransferases gene family involved in caffeine biosynthesis in Coffea canephora. To study this phenomenon, the role of stability of the internal reference gene, as well as the amplification efficiency correction of the primers was investigated. GAPDH and Ubiquitin exhibited a good stability for studying the ontogeny of endosperm tissue, as well as the leaf transcriptome during stress from salicylic acid, methyl jasmonate, PEG-mediated drought and sudden exposure to light. Ubiquitin manifested low variation in Cq under all these stress regimes and in endosperm ontogeny with 30.1–30.9 in the best dataset and 28.8–30.9 in the most deviating dataset. It was observed that problems arising due to improper amplification efficiency of the target or reference genes or both could lead to misinterpretation of gene expression levels. Quantitative RT-PCR performed at a sub-optimal efficiency of GAPDH reference gene at 1.68 led to the faulty interpretation of 2.007 folds upregulation by the 2−ΔΔCt method and 1.705 folds upregulation by Efficiency method for the first NMT (Xanthosine methyltransferase), which actually is repressed during dark acclimatization of coffee plants. Efficiency correction improved the reliability of the expression data and also indicated a downregulation of this gene by 0.485 folds and 0.474 folds using 2−ΔΔCt and E method, respectively, in concordance to earlier reports. Hence, efficiency correction of the primers having suboptimal efficiencies is an absolute prerequisite for the accurate calculation of fold change using quantitative RT-PCR.



Introduction

Caffeine is the most researched molecule from coffee and is designated to a functional role under the ‘Chemical Defense Theory’ (Frischknecht et al. 1985). Nevertheless, there has been much debate about the actual role and the evolution of caffeine in different plant systems. Caffeine accounts for the major purine alkaloid in coffee and is synthesized from the ubiquitous committed precursor, xanthosine, by the Salicylic Acid Benzoic Acid THeobromine Synthase, (SABATH) superfamily of methyltransferases (Kato and Mizuno 2004). With the availability of large EST database and complete sequencing of C. canephora genome (Denouend et al. 2014) much research needs to now focus on transcriptomics and functional characterization of the coffee genome. Caffeine biosynthetic N- methyltransferases are upregulated under influence from light (Kumar et al. 2015a), developmental stage and genotype (Perrios et al. 2015), salicylic acid and methyl jasmonate (Kumar et al. 2015b, 2017). In addition, salinity and drought negatively regulate caffeine content (Kumar et al. 2015c). Future studies on the regulation of caffeine biosynthesis require the assignment of a suitable reference gene for normalization of quantitative PCR.

Quantitative RT-PCR remains a popular tool for transcriptomics due to its ease of application and economic feasibility. Search for appropriate reference gene is indispensable for normalization of qPCR quantification (Kozera and Rapacz 2013). Housekeeping genes like actin, tubulin, GAPDH, ubiquitin, rpl39, and rRNA are routinely used as internal reference genes in different systems (Joseph et al. 2018). However, the reference genes itself vary in their stability and expression level under certain biological conditions. Minimum Information for publication of Quantitative real-time PCR Experiments (MIQE) guidelines (Bustin 2009) recommends the use of most stable reference gene or their combinations for the quantitative analysis of the experimental sets. Technically, it is not feasible to identify a single reference control that can be used for all the experimental sets. Nevertheless, using the statistical programs most suitable combination of reference genes can be selected for each biological experiment sets. The most popular algorithms used for identifying stability of the reference genes include GeNorm (Vandesompele et al. 2002), NormFinder (Andersen et al. 2004), BestKeeper (Pfaffl et al. 2004) and comparative delta-CT (Silver et al. 2006) method, all of which provide a value of stability or normalization factor based on expression of the reference gene in different test and control samples.

Conceptually, relative gene expression by qPCR is calculated by the efficiency method (E method) (Pfaffl 2001), which account for the differences in PCR efficiency of the internal reference gene and target gene and 2−ΔΔCt method that assumes 100% efficiency for both target and reference (Livak 2001). PCR efficiency between samples varies due to dissimilarities in the quantity and quality of cDNA, primer quality, the copy number of transcripts and annealing temperatures. Suboptimal quality of template and primer contribute to errors in calculated fold change due to an appearance of non-stochastic Cq values in the standard curve (Ruijter et al. 2012). PCR efficiency is a critical indicator for the performance of qPCR analysis of multigene families especially involved in secondary metabolism (Arunraj and Samuel 2018). Specificities of primers are not always guaranteed while working with multigene families and the quality of template may vary between samples depending on the impurities in prepared template due to changes in secondary metabolism. Hence, neither 2−ΔΔCT method nor Pfaffl’s E method are necessarily the most accurate description of the actual fold change until efficiencies are optimally corrected. Large-scale qPCR analysis of multigene families requires proper optimization considering all these factors for the generation of reliable data. The present study establishes such errors arising in the quantitation of caffeine biosynthetic NMT gene family in Coffee under light stress and the effect of efficiency correction on the reliability of expression data.


