
Abstract

Accurate prediction of drug-drug interactions (DDI) is a challenging task in drug discovery and development. It requires determination of enzyme inhibition in vitro which is highly system-dependent for many compounds. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the determination of intracellular unbound concentrations in primary human hepatocytes can be used to bridge discrepancies between results obtained using human liver microsomes and hepatocytes. Specifically, we investigated if Kpuu could reconcile differences in CYP enzyme inhibition values (Ki or IC50). Firstly, our methodology for determination of Kpuu was optimized for human hepatocytes, using four well-studied reference compounds. Secondly, the methodology was applied to a series of structurally related CYP2C9 inhibitors from a Roche discovery project. Lastly, the Kpuu values of three commonly used CYP3A4 inhibitors—ketoconazole, itraconazole, and posaconazole—were determined and compared to compound-specific hepatic enrichment factors obtained from physiologically based modeling of clinical DDI studies with these three compounds. Kpuu obtained in suspended human hepatocytes gave good predictions of system-dependent differences in vitro. The Kpuu was also in fair agreement with the compound-specific hepatic enrichment factors in DDI models and can therefore be used to improve estimations of enrichment factors in physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0344-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Accurate predictions of drug-drug interactions (DDIs) are a challenging task during drug development because the relevant inhibitor concentration is not directly accessible. Predictions of DDIs depend on in vitro parameters such as the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) or the inhibition constant (Ki). These in vitro values are then used in physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models to simulate DDIs in vivo.

For predictions of metabolic DDIs with CYP enzymes, Ki or IC50 values for a given compound are typically determined in liver microsomes or in hepatocytes. There is a growing interest in using cryopreserved human hepatocytes (HH) instead of human liver microsomes (HLM) for preclinical DDI assessment. In the microsomal setting, the drug concentration available to interact with the enzyme is equal to the unbound drug concentration in the incubation medium (i.e., the nominal incubation concentration, Cinc, corrected for fraction of unbound drug in the liver microsomes (fu,mic)). However, the HH model may be a more physiologically relevant system than HLM, because it takes into account multiple processes that influence enzyme inhibition. In the hepatocyte setting, compounds need to reach the cell interior where the CYP enzymes are located, a process that may involve passive permeability and active transport. Subsequent to this, the intracellular unbound drug concentration (Cu,cell) may be further influenced by metabolic clearance, protein binding, and partitioning into organelles (e.g., lysosomal trapping) or cellular membranes (5–8). These factors can all contribute to inconsistencies between the Cu,cell and Cinc, leading to differences in the Ki,app or IC50,app values measured in HLM and HH. Therefore, careful consideration must be given to which in vitro system is appropriate for testing enzyme inhibition.

Determination of Cu,cell is especially challenging if active transport is involved and is therefore classified as a low-confidence parameter in PBPK modeling. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) recommended the [I]/Ki ratio (where [I] is the inhibitor concentration) as a parameter in static DDI predictions. However, the determination of [I] is not currently standardized. The surrogates commonly used are the average or maximum unbound concentration in blood or at the inlet to the liver, or the maximum total concentration in the circulation at steady state (10–12). In addition to the different methods to estimate [I], the determination of Ki also varies. For example, Ki,app—based on determinations in cryopreserved HH suspended in human plasma—has been proposed. Such systems aim to reduce in vitro to in vivo translational uncertainties by more closely mimicking the in vivo situation, building protein binding and intracellular bioavailability considerations into the in vitro system.

Strategies for more direct estimations of Cu,cell recently emerged (14–18). These include the parallel determination of hepatocellular drug accumulation at steady state (Kp) and the unbound fraction of drug in the cell (fu,cell) which are combined to calculate the unbound partition coefficient Kpuu. Kpuu is defined as the ratio between unbound drug concentration in the cell interior and the unbound drug concentration in the cell exterior at steady state and can also be derived from kinetic parameters.

We recently introduced the term intracellular bioavailability (Fic), defined as the ratio between the intracellular unbound concentration, which is available to elicit effects inside the cell, and the extracellular concentration. In the present work, Fic is equal to Kpuu, as no protein was added to the incubation media, and therefore, the term Kpuu has been used for simplicity. Fic or Kpuu account for active and passive mechanisms and predict target engagement and phenotypic responses in cells. We have shown that this parameter reflects transporter effects in cell lines transfected with single transporters. Further, we have seen differences in the Kpuu values for freshly isolated, plated HH, and suspended HH. This is explained by the altered clearance in the two systems.

Given this strong influence of culture formats on Kpuu, we hypothesized that Kpuu could be used to reconcile the differences in measurement obtained from different human-relevant experimental systems. We therefore first investigated a series of reference CYP inhibitors (saquinavir, nelfinavir, enoxacin, and clarithromycin) in HLM and HH, previously shown to have differences in Ki,app in rat liver microsomes and rat hepatocytes. Second, we applied an optimized assay for a series of investigational compounds from a drug discovery program that were all identified as CYP2C9 inhibitors. Finally, Kpuu was determined for a series of commonly used CYP inhibitors of the azole antifungal family—ketoconazole, itraconazole, and posaconazole. These compounds were chosen because they require hepatic enrichment factors (referred to as “hepatic uptake value” in the SimCYP software), to reconcile in vitro and in vivo Ki values. We reasoned that these scaling factors represent Kpuu at the site of DDI.



Discussion

In this work, we evaluated the potential of Kpuu as scaling factor for CYP enzyme inhibition studies, using three experimental setups.

For the first set of compounds, we investigated if the determination of intracellular unbound concentrations could be used to reconcile differences in potency in CYP inhibition observed between microsomes and hepatocytes. CYP enzymes can be considered as targets or off-targets facing the cell interior. We have previously shown that Fic or Kpuu can explain differences in potency between isolated intracellular targets in biochemical high-throughput screening assays and the corresponding cellular assays. Drug response for intracellular targets in a variety of subcellular compartments including the cytosol, endosomes, and the nucleus has been successfully predicted, using our methodology for determination of Fic, Fcyto, or Fendo. Intracellular unbound drug concentrations are determined by combining the cellular accumulation ratio (Kp) with the fraction of unbound compound in the cell (fu,cell). fu,cell is determined using the homogenization method which relies on the assumption that the degree of unspecific binding of drugs is not altered upon homogenization of cells.

In the first series of experiments, we used reference compounds with previously reported differences in Ki of CYPs in rat liver microsomes and rat hepatocytes, as well as Kp, fu,cell, and fu,mic values in the rat.

Our experimental human fu,cell values differed more than 100-fold for the two lipophilic drugs compared to those in the rat study that was calculated based on lipophilicity and cellular volume (saquinavir 0.14 vs. 0.0003 and nelfinavir 0.035 vs. 0.0002, rat vs. human, respectively, Table S3). There was a better agreement for the two more hydrophilic compounds (enoxacin 0.99 vs. 1.00 and clarithromycin 0.86 vs. 0.10 in rat vs. human, respectively). The homogenization/membrane dialysis method has been compared with the temperature and lipophilicity methods for estimating the fu,cell of a limited series of structural unrelated compounds by Riede et al.. In their study, the homogenization method gave generally lower values than the temperature and lipophilicity methods. This suggests an overestimation of intracellular binding by the latter two. However, a large variability (up to 13-fold differences) between laboratories has been observed. fu,cell is dependent on accurate dilution factors for scaling fu,hom to fu,cell (Eq. 4 and 5). In the comparative study by Riede et al., very low cell concentrations (130,000 cells/mL) were used, in comparison to 10 million cells/mL in our studies or 50 million cells/mL by Riccardi et al.. Such experimental differences may not allow a reliable comparison between laboratories, but in general, all experimental setups agree on significantly lower fu,cell for highly lipophilic drugs as compared to calculations based on logD. This indicates the importance of using a cellular matrix with relevant lipid and protein binding sites of drugs for the determination of fu,cell. Moreover, no significant inter-species variability in fu,cell has been observed in a recent comparative study. Therefore, for the four reference compounds, the methodological differences were more significant than the expected inter-species variability in fu,cell, and we used our experimental fu,cell values for determination of Kpuu in both rat and human. On the other hand, inter-species variability is expected in Kp values, which can be influenced by active uptake and elimination processes. Therefore, the specific Kp in rat or human hepatocytes was used for determination of Kpuu (Table S3). For the four reference compounds, Kp for the human and rat hepatocytes followed the same rank order and were in the same order of magnitude, with slightly higher values in rat hepatocytes for three out of the four compounds. It should be noted that clarithromycin is a weak base that can be subject to lysosomal trapping. Using pH partitioning theory, the calculated cytosolic Kpuu (or Fcyto) in human hepatocytes would result in 1.3, instead of the experimental value of 2.7, which does not account for subcellular localization of the drug.

Two of the four reference compounds, enoxacin and clarithromycin, displayed a Ki ratio (Ki,mic/Ki,hep) or IC50 ratio and Kpuu above one, indicating a concentrative uptake of the compounds in hepatocytes. By contrast, the Ki ratio or IC50 ratio and Kpuu were less than one for saquinavir and nelfinavir, suggesting that the lower potency in rat hepatocytes was driven by poor access to the intracellular compartment (and to the CYP enzyme) as opposed to the microsomes where the CYP enzyme is freely exposed in the medium. For three out of the four compounds, Ki or IC50 values in liver microsomes and hepatocytes were in good agreement after applying relevant Kpuu and fu,mic as scaling factors (Fig. 1c) (34–36). For nelfinavir, scaling Ki or IC50 values with Kpuu and fu,mic resulted in a larger discrepancy rather than an improvement. Interestingly, nelfinavir was identified as an outlier also in our previous Kpuu studies in MDCK cells, suggesting the involvement of unknown active processes that are not captured by the Kpuu methodology. Nelfinavir is very lipophilic, poorly soluble, and a substrate of active efflux (P-gp)—these properties suggest that the compound is prone to nonspecific binding and that there are significant confounding effects occurring in the hepatocyte experiment. Indeed, poor mass balance (~ 50%) was observed for nelfinavir and the similarly lipophilic saquinavir in the hepatocyte experiments. As the mass balance was recovered in the presence of the CYP inhibitor ABT, this confirms that the loss of compound is due to hepatic metabolism (Fig. S4). The hepatocyte metabolism of nelfinavir and saquinavir has been reported previously in a study that identified these two compounds as outliers. This was based on their intrinsic clearance in microsomes being much higher than in hepatocytes, compared to other compounds with similar clearance mechanisms.

It should be noted, however, that in our studies, the hepatocyte metabolism of nelfinavir and saquinavir was not a limiting factor for establishing the concentration equilibrium, since Kp values were unaffected by the presence or absence of ABT (Fig. S4). Furthermore, the use of albumin or an increase in temperature of wash buffers from 4 to 37°C did not change the results significantly (Fig. S5), which precludes the likelihood that non-specific binding was affecting the results. Thus, the discrepancy in the Ki,corr values of nelfinavir could not be explained by CYP-mediated metabolism or non-specific binding and is likely driven by other factors. Despite the discrepancy for nelfinavir, we overall obtained a significant harmonization of the Ki ratios between microsomes and hepatocytes, suggesting the validity of this approach and indicating the value of further elaboration.

In the next set of experiments, we therefore harmonized the experimental conditions between the CYP inhibition experiments and the Kpuu experiments. Instead of comparing Kpuu to CYP inhibition constants from the literature, we determined IC50 in HH and HLM with methodologies as similar as possible to each other to generate a consistent dataset. As a result, the Kpuu- and fu,mic-corrected IC50 values for the discovery series of CYP2C9 enzyme inhibitors were in excellent agreement for HH and HLM (Fig. 2e). We conclude that the best agreement between the two systems is obtained by applying simultaneous correction factors for both systems, along with taking into consideration differences in assay setup and inter-batch variability.

Given the significance of Kpuu in the two series of in vitro experiments, we next evaluated if it could also be used as a scaling factor in in vivo studies. More specifically, we investigated if Kpuu could be used to estimate the empirical hepatic uptake scalar required in PBPK models of ketoconazole, itraconazole, and posaconazole as CYP inhibitors. Many models use such empirically determined scalars (Fig. 3a). However, others avoid them because the uptake mechanism of these azole compounds are not mediated via classic hepatic uptake transporters such as the OATP or OCT transporter family. Kpuu is a measure of all combined effects in a cell and provides a mechanistic tool for estimation of uptake scalars without the need for elucidating the underlying factors contributing to the net drug disposition in the cell. We found that Kpuu values in suspended HH were in good agreement with the empirically determined hepatic uptake scalars in the models for both rat and human (Fig. 3). In the case of itraconazole, the three major metabolites are equally or more potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 than the parent compound, which is a complicating factor in PBPK modeling. The measurement of Kpuu of the parent compound alone was however sufficient for recovering the hepatic uptake scalars. Therefore, we believe that Kpuu can be rationally integrated into prospective PBPK modeling approaches. The use of HH instead of its rat counterpart reduces the potential effects of inter-species differences in drug transporter expression and metabolic enzyme sensitivity to inhibition. It is also the most relevant in vivo model system for making extrapolations to humans. The relevance of Kpuu to in vivo studies is further supported by a recent study in which a series of four statins was assessed for in vitro and in vivo liver enrichment; in vivo liver-to-plasma, Kpuu in rat and human were in good agreement with in vitro Kpuu obtained in cryopreserved suspended hepatocytes. Similar scenarios are anticipated for, e.g., rifampicin, which has an empirical hepatic uptake scalar of 16.9 and for bosentan, with a hepatic uptake scalar of 5 to 6.

Determination of Ki,app directly in HH can be an alternative to the incorporation of hepatic uptake scalars. However, most Ki screens are based on HLM. To make our approach more generally applicable, we suggest the use of Ki,corr values, and account for intracellular unbound concentrations in the target cells in any tissue of interest (Fig. 4). Our approach is not limited to the liver and can be applied on any cell of interest with an intracellular target, including studies of DDIs in intestinal enterocytes.Fig. 4Summary of use and interpretation of Kpuu in the context of CYP-mediated DDI

Fig. 4

Summary of use and interpretation of Kpuu in the context of CYP-mediated DDI
