
Abstract

Azole antifungal agents are widely used as active ingredients in antifungal pharmaceuticals and agricultural fungicides. An increase in the use of azole antifungals has resulted in an increase in the concentration of these compounds in wastewater and surface water, with potential implications for agriculture. In the present study, bifonazole (BIF) and clotrimazole (CTZ) were selected for investigation because of their widespread use in topical formulations and persistence in the environment. The mycoremediation capacity of BIF and CTZ by mycelia of Lentinula edodes in in vitro culture was evaluated. The main aim of this study was to identify the presumable biodegradation products of the investigated active pharmaceutical substances using the LC/MS/MS method. For this purpose, the media were enriched with the following active pharmaceutical ingredients selected for this study: BIF powder, CTZ powder, and BIF cream, each of them at the same concentration of 0.1 mg/mL. Subsequently, thin-layer chromatography coupled with densitometry was used to evaluate the content of BIF and CTZ in mycelium from in vitro cultures of L. edodes. The degradation process was found to affect primarily the imidazole moiety of both investigated compounds. In addition, the amounts of undegraded investigated compounds were found to be 4.98, 9.26, and 4.56 mg/g dry weight for BIF powder, CTZ powder, and BIF cream, respectively. Therefore, the findings of this study revealed that L. edodes could be considered for remediation of pollution caused by azole antifungal agents.



Introduction

Civilizational development causes increasing environmental contaminations with heavy metals and chemical substances, e.g., medicines, which pose a threat to the health and safety of humans and animals. Furthermore, the commonly used active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) and their degradation products ending up in the environment are currently a global problem. The elimination of pollutants can be achieved, inter alia, by remediation through fungi; this process is known as “mycoremediation”, which is used as a biological tool because of its ability to degrade a wide variety of environmental pollutants, e.g., APIs, and bind with toxic heavy metals present in the environment (Kulshreshtha et al. 2014; Dąbrowska et al. 2018; Kryczyk et al. 2017a). Mycoremediation is a branch of biotechnology that focuses mainly on the assessment of biodegradation capacity of different species of mushrooms and enhancement of their detoxification activity. Because of its desirable characteristics such as high uptake capacity, efficiency, low cost, and safety, mycoremediation is currently becoming an increasingly popular method for eliminating pollutants (Kulshreshtha et al. 2014). However, further efforts are needed to better understand the mechanism underlying the metabolic and enzymatic degradation of the drugs by mushrooms to increase the efficiency of mycoremediation process.

An increase in the consumption of medicines, mainly over-the-counter drugs, is associated with an increase in the risk to the environment. After administration, drugs undergo absorption, metabolism, and excretion into the environment as unchanged drugs and/or their metabolites. Contamination with drugs and their metabolites is also related to their production process and not necessarily to the effective methods of disposal of unused or out-of-date preparations (Larsson 2014; Mudgal et al. 2013). APIs and their metabolites (both biologically active and inactive) may additionally undergo chemical and physical degradation to produce products of unknown structure and activity; thus, pollution due to such agents becomes difficult to control (Muszyńska et al. 2018; Kryczyk et al. 2016).

Antifungal drugs deserve special attention because of their persistence and potential negative impact on the environment (Kahle et al. 2008). Many antifungal drugs are currently used; however, the following groups of drugs play a vital role in the modern therapy of fungal infections: azole derivatives used orally and in topical treatment, squalene epoxidase inhibitors, morpholine derivatives, and polyene antifungal drugs. The presence of antifungal drugs such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole (CTZ), and propiconazole in sewage and surface water has been reported earlier by many studies (Lindberg et al. 2010; Peng et al. 2012; Peschka et al. 2007; Van De Steene and Lambert 2008; Van De Steene et al. 2010; Minguez et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2010; Roberts and Thomas 2006). Previous studies have revealed that antifungal drugs present in the natural environment may pose an ecotoxicological threat, especially to aquatic organisms (Casado et al. 2014; Halm-Lemeille and Gomez 2016; Boxall 2004; Yamagishi et al. 2017). Clotrimazole is on the List of Chemicals for Priority Action of OSPAR Commission, because of its persistence in the environment and bioaccumulative and ecotoxicological properties (OSPAR Commission 2005). In the Netherlands, the maximum permissible concentration has been set for CTZ (Mudgal et al. 2013). However, CTZ is not completely removed during sewage treatment, which can cause contamination of agricultural soil through municipal biosolids or wastewater (Sabourin et al. 2011). In addition, it has ecotoxicological effects at environmentally realistic concentrations and affects algal communities at picomolar concentrations (Mudgal et al. 2013; Porsbring et al. 2009). One of the most frequently described methods for effective elimination of contaminations caused by pharmaceutical preparations from the environment is photocatalytic degradation. Antifungal drugs are subject to photocatalytic degradation in the presence of TiO2 and ZnO under UVA radiation, but they are resistant to photolysis (Kryczyk et al. 2017b, c; Kryczyk-Poprawa et al. 2018). However, the available literature lacks information on the bioremediation of antifungal drugs. Therefore, the main aim of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the use of edible fungus Lentinula edodes (Berk). Pegler in remediating the pollution caused by the azole antifungal agents. Lentinula edodes was selected for investigation because of its effectiveness in the mycoremediation of xenobiotics such as cephalosporin antibiotics, synthetic testosterone, and 17α-ethynylestradiol (Muszyńska et al. 2018; Dąbrowska et al. 2018).

Clotrimazole and bifonazole (BIF) were selected for further investigation due to their widespread use in topical preparations and persistence in the environment. In addition, their biodegradation mechanism has not been studied comprehensively, and therefore, no information is available on their role in mycoremediation process. Furthermore, structures of the products formed were identified using the UPLC/MS/MS/technique. Quantitative analysis of selected medicinal substances was carried out by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) coupled with the densitometry method.


