
Abstract

The current report assesses the efficiency of encapsulation–desiccation protocol to cryopreserve oil palm (Elaeis guineensis Jacq.) polyembryoids. Specifically identified polyembryoids, comprising of haustorium and torpedo-shaped structures, were encapsulated [comprising 3% (w/v) sodium alginate and 100 mM CaCl2]. Calcium alginate-encapsulated and sucrose-precultured polyembryoids were subjected to different spans of desiccation in a laminar air-flow cabinet, followed by freezing in liquid nitrogen. The effect of sucrose preculture (with gradual exposure to 0.3, 0.5, 0.75 and 1 M for 7 days) and dehydration periods (0–10 h) under sterile air-flow on post-freezing survival and regrowth of encapsulated polyembryoids were studied. Cryopreserved and thawed polyembryoids (initially precultured in sucrose, followed by 9 h air-desiccated to 23.3% moisture content) displayed the highest survival percentage (73.3%) and regeneration (of shoot, root and secondary somatic embryo) on Murashige and Skoog regrowth medium containing sucrose (0.3–1 M) and 0.2 mg/l 2,4-dichlorophenoxy acetic acid. In addition, ultrastructural study using scanning electron microscopy exhibited successful revival of cryopreserved polyembryoids, owing to retention of cellular membrane stability through optimized and protected (encapsulated) desiccation. The present study thus substantiates the potential of this encapsulation–desiccation procedure in cryopreservation of oil palm polyembryoids for long-term conservation programs.



Introduction

Oil palm (Elaies guineensis Jacq.) is a tropical plant, which originates from the Gulf of Guinea in West Africa, hence popularly known as the African oil palm. It is a perennial crop with a productive life of longer than 50 years; however, economically, the life span is about 20–25 years. Palm oil is now a primary source of viable and renewable raw material for the world’s food, oleo chemical and biofuel industries. It is currently the world’s second most highly consumed oil. Palm oil production in Malaysia, the second biggest grower after Indonesia, for the year 2019 is anticipated to cross 24 million tonnes as compared to ~ 20 million tonnes that was produced in 2018 (http://bepi.mpob.gov.my/index.php/en/).

Vegetative propagation of oil palm by tissue culture has significant advantages over conventional breeding (Sogeke 1998). Tissue culture is extensively utilized for mass propagation of oil palm mainly by large companies for their own use and at a pilot scale. Theoretically with the aid of tissue culture, the uniformity of the planting materials can be maintained, thus leading to an increase in yield of up to 20% in contrast to seedlings. However, the tissue culture technique for oil palm is quite complex and time consuming. In oil palm, the main complication that impedes the development of an economically sustainable propagation system is the non-uniform growth of tissue-cultured materials in culture jar, as well as low frequency of embryogenesis and plantlet production (Dumet et al. 1993a; Gantait et al. 2017). In addition, the time frame needed for the formation of complete plantlets from cell suspension culture also takes very long duration which is around 2–3 years. Often within a single culture vessel, various stages of development can be observed (Gantait et al. 2015). Hence, the ability to identify the best stage for conversion into plantlet is necessary to produce uniform seedlings. In oil palm, detailed description of the stages from cell suspension culture to plantlet formation, and identification of optimal stage for conservation were well documented (Palanyandy et al. 2013). However, upon obtaining the best stage of development, it is necessary to establish methods to conserve the propagules for future use. To store the samples for later use, short- or long-term, the simplest approach would be to employ cryopreservation techniques.

Nevertheless, in the past two decades, cryopreservation technique has gained much popularity as a storage technique for difficult-to-store materials. It is also often a technique that is used for long-term conservation of genetic recourses of intermediate and recalcitrant materials. Cryopreservation is an attractive alternative for the storage of plant material at ultra-low temperature (− 196 °C); specifically, the temperature of liquid nitrogen (LN). At this temperature, cell division and all other biological activities get completely arrested. According to Towill, allocation of cells from room temperature to − 196 °C should be done in such a manner that the viability of the stored material is maintained, so that their biological activities and growth can be resumed following thawing and transfer to regrowth medium. Whilst some cryopreservation methods are dependent upon the use of expensive cryogenic facilities, yet there are some techniques that involve simplified procedures, which permit direct immersion of plant material in LN for cryopreservation. For instance, the encapsulation–desiccation procedure (Dereuddre et al. 1990) is one of such techniques in which the plant material is coated with alginic acid solution and desiccated prior to LN exposure (Gantait et al. 2017).

Generally, naked tissues are very sensitive towards mechanical injuries due to changes in the culture conditions. Mechanical injuries occur easily during handling and transfer process, especially due to usage of forceps. Continual exposure in same media for certain duration also can lead to desiccation of tissues. Alginate encapsulation and sucrose preculture was successfully utilized in many studies to minimize the losses owing to handling as well as desiccation treatment (Gantait et al. 2017). Although there exists some limited reports on alginate encapsulation (Inpuay and Te-chato 2012; Mariani et al. 2014; Palanyandy et al. 2015), however, comprehensive published work on oil palm for cryopreservation is scarce till date. It is hypothesized that encapsulation of oil palm polyembryoids, followed by a degree of desiccation will make the embryoids latent so that growth would reinstate only after the moisture content is elevated. This method (encapsulation) will protect the tissues from any mechanical damage as it also will ease handling while in storage, either for short-term or long-term. Earlier studies have shown that artificial seeds treated with sucrose preculture gave better response since sucrose protects the tissues and nucleic acid from inactivation and also acts as an osmoticum agent that dehydrates the tissues and stabilizes the membrane (Towill 1991). In addition, encapsulation helps to protect tissue from direct exposure to sucrose preculture, since increasing levels of sucrose concentration may lead to toxicity. Explants are encapsulated in alginate beads, pre-grown in liquid medium enriched with sucrose, partially desiccated to a moisture content, then frozen rapidly (Engelmann 1997). The reduction of the moisture content (MC) of encapsulated explants to a minimal level is a necessary step for successful cryopreservation (Gonzalez-Arnao and Engelmann 2006). This aim could be achieved by combining the preculture of the encapsulated explants in sucrose-containing medium with their subsequent dehydration in silica gel or under sterile air-flow.

Therefore, the objective of this study was to assess the effects of sucrose preculture and desiccation on encapsulated and naked (non-encapsulated) oil palm polyembryoids, and also to assess the effects of LN exposure on encapsulated oil palm polyembryoids to obtain optimum survival percentage for storage.



Discussion

Based on the results obtained from the sucrose preculture experiments, it can be clearly deduced that encapsulated and sucrose precultured polyembryoids exhibited better survival percentage in comparison with that of the non-precultured polyembryoids. This is because sucrose ensures membrane integrity during dehydration and safeguards the stability of isolated proteins in the same way (Carpenter et al. 1993). Generally, once encapsulated and protected with alginate coat, somatic embryos placed on high sucrose concentration medium tends to undergo intensive plasmolysis but without damage (le Roux et al. 2016). Besides that, coating embryos with calcium alginate before progressive plasmolysis, makes it easier to handle them especially after drying under LAF and protects them from injuries caused by excessive dehydration, which eventually results in higher survival percentage after treatment. Thus, based on the results obtained, it can clearly be seen that gradual sucrose preculture gave better survival percentage for oil palm polyembryoids once they were protected with encapsulation coating. During stepwise preculture, the progressive increase in sugar concentration favoured dehydration of encapsulated polyembryoids (Paul et al. 1994). Sucrose pretreatment associated with desiccation was envisaged as a way of inducing a quiescent state in embryos, mimicking the behaviour of true seed. Besides that, true seeds have their own protective seed coat and nutritive accessory tissues (Gray and Purohit 1991), which lacks in somatic embryos. Thus, encapsulation technique appeared to be the best substitute, which would provide nutrients and protective coat for the somatic embryos to grow vigorously, especially in the presence of sucrose, and even after desiccation it would not lose much viability. Superiority of sucrose over other sugars was also reported in cryo-tolerance of oil palm somatic embryo clumps (Dumet et al. 1994). Since encapsulated oil palm polyembryoids, following sucrose preculture, exhibited better survival upon desiccation, it (sucrose preculture) seems to be a promising step for successful storage, either short term or long term. Sucrose, as an effective agent in enhancing dehydration tolerance, has been reported by many researchers (Uchendu et al. 2016; Nakkanong and Nualsri 2018; Yang et al. 2019). As stated earlier, during the sucrose preculture, with the decrease in MC, the amount of dry matter increased considerably. Thus, from this preliminary study, it can be recognized that encapsulation and sucrose preculture is efficient enough for successful storage of oil palm polyembryoids. Meanwhile, exposure of naked polyembryoids to sucrose treatment caused lethal damage, which led to reduction in survival percentage prior to storage; since the naked polyembryoids were directly exposed to increasing levels of sucrose that caused toxic effects to the polyembryoids.

Gradual sucrose preculture, carried out to desiccate the encapsulated polyembryoids, aided in the reduction of MC from 87 to 67.8%. This result indicated that during pretreatment there was an uptake of solutes (sucrose) into the beads, with a concomitant reduction in MC. Further desiccation using LAF would have enhanced the vitrification ability of beads during freezing in LN. The results showed that the viability of LN-treated polyembryoids was directly related to the survival percentage of desiccated polyembryoids. With the existence of high MC, the freezable water present in cells led to ice crystallization during LN exposure which eventually directed to cell death. Therefore, the most critical factor in cryopreservation would be the MC of the encapsulated polyembryoids at the moment of immersion in LN. It was observed that the polyembryoids, following 8 h of desiccation and subsequent LN exposure, survived better than those of the control (not treated with LN). Similar observation was reported by Dumet et al. (1993b) and it can be attributed to differential reactions of clonal nature.

According to Benson, the desiccation phase is vital, since the availability of additional moisture in cell may result in post-freezing chemical, mechanical, and osmotic stresses. It also leads to dysfunction of membrane proteins which would tend to collapse following mechanical stress (Varghese and Naithani 2002). Hence, the span of desiccation period, to attain ideal MC in explants, should therefore be regulated carefully. Limited number of research studies was conducted so far to establish the relationship between gradual decline in ice and glass formation (during freezing) with the enhanced survival of oil palm somatic embryos, following LN exposure (Dumet et al. 1993c). For instance, a high percentage of post-thaw survival was fruitfully documented for oil palm somatic embryos when those were desiccated to 0.5 g H2O/g dry weight before freezing (Dumet et al. 1993c). In the present study, the optimum MC that was identified for successful cryopreservation of polyembryoids was 23.3%. LAF desiccation for 9 h proved to be optimum to attain this MC that resulted in highest percentage of survival, supported by morphological evidence. The cryopreservation of oil palm polyembryoids was successfully done using vitrification and droplet-vitrification methods by Suranthran et al. and Gantait et al., in which 45% and 68% survival was obtained, respectively. Dumet et al. (1993b) also reported cryopreservation of oil palm by desiccating the embryoids up to a MC of 19–35% with variable success rate. The cryopreservation method that was employed in the present study, as well as the initial plant material used, directly attributed to the differential success rate. High percentage of success rate (73.3% survival) was attained at 23.3% MC, using encapsulation–desiccation method that further established that the encapsulated polyembryoids ensured good percentage of recovery after cryopreservation and led to simultaneous production of plantlets as and when required.

Besides that, encapsulation–desiccation proved to be a better choice over vitrification, since the latter showed a tendency to exert the toxic effects that eventually led to the death of cells. The introduction of plant material to highly concentrated vitrification solution is ideally detrimental owing to the phytotoxic effects of different components and also their collective osmotic effects on cell viability (Towill and Jarret 1992). Moreover, exposure to the vitrification solution for longer duration would result in complete disruption of the plasma membrane (Steponkus et al. 1992). Therefore, these characters are the major reasons that attributed to the reduction in the survival percentage during cryopreservation using conventional vitrification and droplet-vitrification methods in oil palm (Suranthran et al. 2012; Gantait et al. 2015). Hence, as an alternative to vitrification approach, a nontoxic process involving alginate encapsulation and dehydration method was identified as the suitable cryopreservation method for oil palm polyembryoids in this study; wherein, it was distinctly evident that the protective coat provided by encapsulation, protected the polyembryoids from desiccation and freezing injury. Encapsulation–desiccation approach was also used for successful cryopreservation of hop shoot tips (Matinez-Montero et al. 1998), Ribes ciliatum (Dumet et al. 2000) and several tropical plant species such as citrus, cassava and potato (reviewed by Gonzalez-Arnao et al. 2008).

It was reported that the duration of air desiccation appeared to be the crucial variable that exerted the maximum influence in several cryopreservation methods used for a range of plant materials including oil palm. In oil palm, post-cryopreservation survival of somatic embryos (precultured in 0.75 M sucrose medium) was significantly enhanced following 12 h (70% survival) and 16 h (80%) desiccation, but without any encapsulation with sodium alginate (Dumet et al. 1993a). On the other hand, following encapsulation, 18 h preculture in 0.75 M sucrose, and 3 h desiccation, survival percentage of in vitro-grown apical meristems of Ribes plants was enhanced significantly (Barbara et al. 2005). In the present experiment, lower desiccation time (9 h) was required in LAF to significantly reduce the MC of encapsulated oil palm polyembryoids to ~ 23.3% to obtain the highest survival percentage (73.3%). However, according to Dumet et al. (1993b), it took as high as 16 h desiccation duration to obtain 70% survival after LN exposure, for oil palm somatic embryo. But for the encapsulated and sucrose precultured oil palm polyembryoids, it took lesser desiccation duration (9 h) to obtain optimum MC (23.3%) for a higher survival percentage (73.3. %). Sakai et al. reported that in an abridged encapsulation–dehydration protocol (using a mixture of 2 M glycerol and 0.4 M sucrose during the encapsulation process and desiccated using silica gel), higher rates of recovery in three plant species (chrysanthemum, mint, and wasabi) was achieved in comparison to that of the typical vitrification methods. It is suggested that this simplified protocol should be applied to oil palm polyembryoids to obtain better success rate. Careful assessment of each step prior to LN exposure is essential to confirm highest viability of cryopreserved plant germplasms. Thus, the potential of different cryopreservation methods should be validated or compared for optimisation of the prime protocol for the conservation of germplasm of interest.
