
Abstract

IL-7 receptor-α (IL-7Rα) blockade has been shown to reverse autoimmune diabetes in the non-obese diabetic mouse by promoting inhibition of effector T cells and consequently altering the balance of regulatory T (Treg) and effector memory (TEM) cells. PF-06342674 is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to and inhibits the function of IL-7Rα. In the current phase 1b study, subjects with type 1 diabetes (T1D) received subcutaneous doses of either placebo or PF-06342674 (1, 3, 8 mg/kg/q2w or 6 mg/kg/q1w) for 10 weeks and were followed up to 18 weeks. Nonlinear mixed effects models were developed to characterize the pharmacokinetics (PK), target engagement biomarkers, and immunomodulatory activity. PF-06342674 was estimated to have 20-fold more potent inhibitory effect on TEM cells relative to Treg cells resulting in a non-monotonic dose-response relationship for the Treg:TEM ratio, reaching maximum at ~ 3 mg/kg/q2w dose. Target-mediated elimination led to nonlinear PK with accelerated clearance at lower doses due to high affinity binding and rapid clearance of the drug-target complex. Doses ≥ 3 mg/kg q2w result in sustained PF-06342674 concentrations higher than the concentration of cellular IL-7 receptor and, in turn, maintain near maximal receptor occupancy over the dosing interval. The results provide important insight into the mechanism of IL-7Rα blockade and immunomodulatory activity of PF-06342674 and establish a rational framework for dose selection for subsequent clinical trials of PF-06342674. Furthermore, this analysis serves as an example of mechanistic modeling to support dose selection of a drug candidate in the early phases of development.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0401-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease characterized by T cell–mediated destruction of the insulin-secreting beta cells, resulting in insulin deficiency and hyperglycemia . The standard-of-care treatment is daily insulin injections in an effort to normalize blood glucose levels throughout the day and ultimately to prevent long-term diabetic complications including diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy. Despite the improvements in management of diabetes, there are no approved therapies which modulate the course of disease, and a large proportion of subjects with T1D fail to achieve optimal glycemic control.

Disease progression in T1D can be quantified as a loss of pancreatic beta cell function over a period of years, approximately 70% of which is prior to appearance of hyperglycemia and glycosuria . The destruction of beta cells is a consequence of direct cytotoxicity mediated by beta cell–reactive T cells. The autoreactive T cell response in T1D has been attributed in part to a loss of peripheral tolerance caused by a relative increase in the ratio of effector memory (TEM) compared with regulatory T cell (Treg), which stem from both genetic and environmental factors . The T cell subsets, along with their relative ratios, have been used as surrogate biomarkers in early phase trials in T1D. Enhanced ratios of Treg to potentially pathogenic TEM cells have been associated with preservation of beta cell function in subjects with new onset T1D .

The IL-7 receptor-α (IL-7Rα) gene is one of the several genetic loci that has been linked to susceptibility to T1D . IL-7Rα is expressed both as a soluble receptor and a membrane bound receptor on the surface of thymocytes and T cells, both of which bind the cytokine IL-7 . IL-7 is critical for T cell development and function, particularly the survival and activity of CD4+ and CD8+ TEM cells . Independent preclinical studies in the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse evaluating monoclonal antibodies (mAb) targeting IL-7Rα have demonstrated reversal of autoimmune diabetes by promoting inhibition of diabetogenic TEM cells and consequently altering the balance of Treg and TEM cells .

Notably, a number of agents that were effective in prevention and reversal of diabetes in NOD mice have subsequently failed to show efficacy (e.g., GAD65 (alum), sitagliptin and lansoprazole, anti-IL-1, anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG)), or were only partially effective (Fc receptor nonbinding anti-CD3 mAbs and anti-CD20 mAb) in clinical trials . These failures point to key clinical development challenges including a narrow window of time for treatment of subjects diagnosed with T1D, given their declining beta cell function, as well as an insufficient understanding of dose-response (DR) relationships in early clinical trials . Since early clinical trials are not usually long enough nor are they powered to detect changes in clinical response endpoints such as C-peptide, it is essential to establish a model-based framework to characterize and delineate the measures of pharmacokinetics (PK), target engagement, and immunomodulatory activity obtained from the early clinical trials and to explore potential dose and exposure-response relationships to guide design of subsequent trials.

PF-06342674 is a fully human immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) mAb that binds to IL-7Rα blocking cognate binding of IL-7 and inhibiting IL-7Rα signaling and function. PF-06342674 has previously been evaluated following single ascending doses by either subcutaneous (SC) or intravenous (IV) routes of administration in healthy volunteers (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01740609), and following multiple ascending doses (MAD) administered by subcutaneous injection in adults with T1D (ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02038764) . In the MAD study, the safety and tolerability of multiple SC doses of PF-06342674 were evaluated in adults diagnosed with T1D within 2 years of study entry. Additional study objectives included characterization of PK and exposure-response relationships of PF-06342674 on IL-7Rα target engagement and PD biomarkers. For this purpose, the analysis described herein was carried out utilizing two target engagement biomarkers (total soluble IL-7 receptor measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and cellular IL-7 receptor occupancy (RO) measured by flow cytometry) and absolute count of two surrogate markers (Treg and TEM) measured by flow cytometry. The goals were to develop models describing the population and individual PK/PD profiles; to identify potential sources of PK nonlinearity; and to quantify PK/PD variability. The resulting model could then be used to gain quantitative understanding of the PK/PD relationships and provide simulations for doses not evaluated in the study (e.g., 6 mg/kg q2w). Altogether, the results would be used for dose selection for a proof-of-concept trial aimed at evaluation of clinical response endpoints in subjects with T1D.



DISCUSSION

A mechanism-based model was proposed which integrates the PK and target engagement biomarker profiles into a single mathematical framework, described by a set of algebraic and ordinary differential equations. The estimated rate of absorption and peripheral volume of distribution were consistent with previous estimates for therapeutic mAbs . The estimate of the central volume of distribution (1.1 L) was lower relative to published values for mAbs (2.4 to 5.5 L) which may have been due to the lack of PK data in T1D subjects following IV administration as well as rapid binding of PF-06342674 to IL-7Rα in the central compartment. Clearance of free mAb (CLA = 1 L/day) was more rapid than the value reported for mAbs which ranged from 0.2 to 0.5 L/day . Estimation of the dissociation constant for drug-target binding (KD), which relied on rich PK/PD sampling schemes and measurements of drug concentration, total soluble receptor, and cellular receptor using independent bioanalytical approaches, indicated that PF-06342674 binds with high affinity to cellular (KD2 = 0.450 nM) and soluble IL-7 receptor targets (KD1 = 0.779 nM).

Clearance of the mAb:sIL7Rα complex (CLC1 = 0.2 L/day) was slower than free sIL7Rα (CLSR = 2.5 L/day), which is reflected in the observation that total sIL7Rα increased considerably following each dose of PF-06342674. The observation that CLC1 is smaller than free mAb clearance is one indication that the soluble receptor pathway is not the main driver of nonlinear PK as it does not contribute in a profound way to accelerated clearance at low PF-06342674 concentrations where the drug is largely saturated by the targets. This is plausible since soluble targets often act as carriers of ligands as opposed to cellular targets which can undergo receptor-mediated endocytosis and degradation. In contrast, the clearance of the mAb:cIL7Rα complex was 10-fold more rapid than free mAb clearance suggesting elimination via the cellular receptor is likely the key source of nonlinear PK.

Model-based estimation of individual baseline concentration of cellular receptor was necessary as it was not directly measured, due to the units being post-treatment median fluorescence intensity relative to baseline. Likewise, estimation of clearance of free cIL7Rα was not supported by the data and therefore, it was assumed that mAb:cIL7Rα complex clearance was equal to free cIL7Rα clearance (i.e., CLC2 = CLCR). In contrast, measurement of the concentration of sIL7Rα at baseline provided sufficient information for estimation of both population mean and individual concentration (BLSR = 0.45 nM, IIVBLSR = 35%).

Other than BLSR, the sources of inter-individual variability were attributed to variation in absorption rate (31%), central volume (7%), and clearance of the free antibody (43%). Thus, the variability in RO is due predominantly to variability in PK parameters, along with residual error. Inspection of individual profiles (Fig. 2) supports this interpretation, where the direction and magnitude of the difference between population prediction and individual predictions are similar for PK and free RO. This finding suggests that in prospective studies, PK concentration could be considered a surrogate for RO, which can help reduce or eliminate the need for additional blood collections and procedure burden since RO assays often require analysis of fresh samples within 2 days of collection.

It may be anticipated that variability in absorption rate and clearance of the free antibody could be related to host factors including, for example, site of injection, body composition, and age. A systemic covariate analysis to further assess potential sources of variability in PK parameters was not conducted. Upon further development of PF-06342674, these types of additional analyses are warranted and could be used to support justification for changing from body weight–based dosing to flat-dosing which can provide greater convenience for subcutaneous administration.

A DR model was utilized to establish the DR relationship for key immunomodulatory endpoints. In mammals, generation and differentiation of T cells occur in primary lymphoid organs. All mature lymphocytes circulate through secondary lymphoid organs. T lymphocytes then transmigrate into tissue, which can be tissue-specific, and organs via a multi-step pathway . The model assumes turnover of both Treg and TEM explained by a single rate describing the input and elimination; reduction in the absolute counts due to the inhibition on the input rate; and the effect of PF-06342674 on T cells follows an Emax relationship. Under these assumptions, the downstream modulation of lymphocyte subsets exhibited a delayed effect relative to PK and RO time courses (Fig. 2), due likely to a slower turnover rate for TEM and Treg relative to the half-life of PF-06342674 (t1/2~3 days). To describe this hysteresis, an indirect response model was used to characterize the time-course of immunomodulation similar to the model developed to characterize the effect of an S1P modulator on reduction of T, B, and NK cells . The DR models adequately fit to the T cell data from subjects and retained the general mechanism of action of PF-06342674 with only four structural parameters. The effect of PF-06342674 was modeled as an inhibitory Emax function on the zero-order input rate, which reflects PF-06342674 binding to IL-7Rα and preventing T cell activation and proliferation by down-modulation of the IL-7 signaling pathway.

Summarized across the groups, absolute cell counts at baseline were higher for TEMversus Treg, corresponding to an overall Treg:TEM ratio of 0.7. This value was accurately estimated by the model and was explained by the turnover rates of these cell populations (i.e., baseline = kin/kout). Comparison among the groups indicated differences in mean cell counts. Because of this, it was important to model this data in absolute cell count to retain the information between groups as this approach would yield a more accurate characterization of the underlying DR relationships. Furthermore, modeling the absolute count facilitated estimation of the Treg:TEM ratio and in turn provided the opportunity to characterize the DR for this measure of immune activity. Following multiple SC injections of PF-06342674, a dose-dependent relationship was observed in the reversal of the Treg:TEM ratio with a maximum observed at ~ 3 mg/kg q2w. This reversal was due to the 20-fold higher potency of PF-06342674 on TEM relative to Treg. This was anticipated, as it has been shown that human Treg expresses lower levels of IL-7Rα . The current model suggests that doses up to those which approach maximal RO are needed for maximizing the Treg:TEM ratio, but at higher doses approaching the ED50 for the effect of PF-06342674 on Treg (7 mg/kg/q2w), the ratio starts to decline. Overall, the observed increase in the Treg:TEM ratio provides evidence that IL-7Rα blockade may shift the balance from autoimmunity towards immune tolerance.

Lastly, we hope that this communication can serve as an example of how one can gain quantitative understanding of the PK/PD relationships for a drug candidate in early development, where the study sample size and treatment duration are limited, using insightful mechanistic modeling approaches to inform the designs of subsequent clinical trials and particularly dose selection. Such an effort may benefit from the model-based integration that takes advantage of full profiles of PK and multiple PD measures in overcoming limitations, such as small sample size, often encountered in early development. In the present study, the model-based integration of PK, target engagement biomarker, and immunomodulatory activity data offered quantitative understanding of the PK/PD relationships consistent with the postulated mechanism of IL-7Rα blockade and immunomodulatory activity of PF-06342674. This understanding strengthened not only the early evidence of therapeutic effects of the drug candidate in patients but also the confidence of using a simplified DR relationship for dose determinations, as well as utilizing simplified clinical pharmacology study procedures (relying only on PK measures) in future clinical trials. It should be also noted that the model-based integration as such can remain challenging in terms of uncertainty of the model parameter estimation, even with the use of multiple related PD measures and rich PK/PD sampling schemes. To this end, in the present study, the number of model parameters to be estimated was reduced, with fixing the intercompartmental clearance and bioavailability based on the respective prior information under the assumption that for this mAb drug candidate, these two parameters are not study-specific. Borrowing the intercompartmental clearance and bioavailability estimates from the preceding single ascending dose study in healthy volunteers using SC and IV routes of administration helped improve certainty of the model parameter estimates in the present study (data not shown), especially for those related to the target engagement and binding-mediated eliminations.
