




Discussion

Minimally-invasive CT-guided spine procedures are commonly performed in radiology departments to provide targeted, individualized diagnostic testing and pain management to patients. The ability for novice trainees to learn and practice these procedures on a phantom model would limit intra-procedural risk and radiation dose to patients. To the best of our knowledge, no study to date has evaluated the efficacy of using a realistic 3D printed lumbar spine phantom to train novice practitioners on the performance of CT-guided procedures. The results of our study indicate that a training curriculum using such a phantom model would increase confidence and proficiency in performing CT-guided spine procedures.

The novice trainees recruited into the study had no experience with CT-guided spine procedures, and, as expected, there was no significant difference between the pre-test knowledge of the Control and Training groups. The Control group, which only received one training session, took the post-test on the same day as the pre-test, shortly after receiving the didactic lecture, and thus performed slightly better on the post-test as compared to the Training group, which took their written post-test on a return session separated by approximately 2 weeks. Subsequent to the training sessions, both the Training and Control groups reported a statistically significant increase in their confidence in performing CT-guided spine procedures.

Regarding the technical aspect of the training, after only one additional training session, the Training group demonstrated a significant reduction in the number of needle adjustments required to achieve final needle position within the facet joint, suggesting that training increases mechanical proficiency. Fewer and more precise adjustments translate to better patient safety when trainees perform these procedures in the real clinical setting. Since a new CT scan is acquired each time the needle is readjusted, fewer needle readjustments also correlates directly to lower radiation dose.

Several issues must be considered when deciding the proper method by which novice trainees can gain procedural experience. Many procedures can be learned through real-time performance on patients in clinical practice, under the supervision of an experienced practitioner. For more technically challenging and high-risk procedures, however, this training method raises the ethical issue of patient risk. Such procedures can be practiced on cadavers, but cadavers may be expensive and difficult to access. Animal models are also expensive and difficult to access, and are associated with issues related to animal-borne diseases and comparative anatomy. Prior studies have proposed the use of commercially available spine models for the practice of spine interventions , but these models lack realistic degenerative characteristics that make real-life spine procedures challenging. Thus, we concluded that a 3D printed phantom of a realistic degenerative lumbar spine embedded in gelatin is the best training tool, as it mimics the complexities of a real patient spine and demonstrates both life-like tactile feedback and realistic radiographic density.

Several prior studies on phantom-based training have used various performance metrics to assess technical proficiency. Some studies using phantom models to practice ultrasound-guided spine procedures have used the overall time required for task completion , number of needle re-entries , number of needle passes , ergonomics , localization of the lesion , appropriate needle insertion , visualization of the needle throughout the procedure , and proper placement of the needle on the target lesion . Other studies on minimally-invasive surgery have used time to completion of surgery, an anatomic check-list, and a safety-check list . In our study, we use the number of needle readjustments required to achieve final needle position as the performance metric because it serves as a corollary of several factors: proper skin entry position, number of CT acquisitions required, overall procedural time, and radiation dose.

Similar to our experience with CT, one prior study using ultrasound has found that a similar spine model embedded in gelatin demonstrates realistic tissue-like texture for the practice of sonographically-guided spinal and epidural steroid injections . Kwon et al. used a spine phantom embedded in gelatin to teach ultrasound-guided facet injections and medial branch blocks to novice operators and achieved results similar to our study. The training group demonstrated increased confidence as well as increased proficiency at these procedures, as evidenced through a faster overall procedure time.

Our study has several limitations. The study may have been underpowered to detect some statistical differences. Due to limitations in student and scanner availability, the Training group only received one additional training session compared to the Control group. In the absence of a larger sample size, more prolonged training may have accentuated the findings of the current study, supporting the benefits of training with a phantom model. With sufficient training, a previously inexperienced operator may be able to achieve the same level of proficiency as an experienced operator, who may be able to perform a facet injection after only 2–3 needle manipulations. Additionally, the study focused on the performance of CT-guided facet blocks, which may not be generalizable to other procedures, such as CT-guided transforaminal nerve blocks, interlaminar epidural steroid injections, or other more complex procedures. Finally, as an inanimate phantom was used in the training sessions, the results of reported self-confidence may reflect an inflated false confidence, since secondary issues associated real patients, such as movement, pain, and positioning, were not accounted for.

For future investigation and training, additional spine training models can be made based off of differing patient anatomy, including cervical spine models. As no two patients have similar anatomy, introducing a different model during subsequent training sessions can test the trainee’s ability to synthesize knowledge and problem solve in real-time. Additionally, involving radiology residents and fellows in such training will allow trainees at various stages of knowledge and technical acumen to improve their skills at spine procedures.
