
Abstract

The rate and extent of drug dissolution in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract are highly dependent upon drug physicochemical properties and GI fluid properties. Biorelevant dissolution media (BDM), which aim to facilitate in vitro prediction of in vivo dissolution performance, have evolved with our understanding of GI physiology. However, BDM with a variety of properties and compositions are available, making the choice of dissolution medium challenging. In this tutorial, we describe a simple and quantitative methodology for selecting practical, yet physiologically relevant BDM representative of fasted humans for evaluating dissolution of immediate release formulations. Specifically, this methodology describes selection of pH, buffer species, and concentration and evaluates the importance of including bile salts and phospholipids in the BDM based upon drug substance log D, pKa, and intrinsic solubility. The methodology is based upon a mechanistic understanding of how three main factors affect dissolution, including drug ionization at gastrointestinal pH, alteration of surface pH by charged drug species, and drug solubilization in mixed lipidic aggregates comprising bile salts and phospholipids. Assessment of this methodology through testing and comparison with literature reports showed that the recommendations correctly identified when a biorelevant buffer capacity or the addition of bile salts and phospholipids to the medium would appreciably change the drug dissolution profile. This methodology can enable informed decisions about when a time, complexity, and/or cost-saving buffer is expected to lead to physiologically meaningful in vitro dissolution testing, versus when a more complex buffer would be required.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-0417-8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.

One of the many challenging tasks facing formulators developing and testing drug candidates is the selection of the optimal dissolution medium with which to conduct in vitro tests. The goal is to select a medium and test protocol that produces in vitro results that accurately reflect the rate and extent of drug dissolution in vivo—an increasingly difficult task, given the quantity of complex molecules in drug pipelines and the variety of media types and compositions available. Selection of the optimum dissolution medium depends strongly on the physicochemical properties of the drug and the fluid properties of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.

Conventional dissolution media, such as simple US Pharmacopeia (USP) buffers (e.g., hydrochloric acid, 50-mM phosphate, acetate, and citrate) have been used for solubility and dissolution assessment for decades and are referenced in the majority of USP monographs. These media can be valuable and provide simple, reasonably accurate assessments of in vivo solubility and dissolution rate in some cases, such as for highly soluble, highly permeable compounds (Class 1 Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) compounds). However, these media do not mimic the properties and composition of GI fluids, which vary along the length of the intestine and exhibit high inter- and intra-subject variability (5–12) (see Table I for key GI fluid properties).Table IRelevant Properties of Fasted-State Human Gastric Fluid (FaHGF) and Human Intestinal Fluid (FaHIF) (jejunum) that Affect DissolutionPropertyValueFaHGF (stomach)FaHIF (duodenum)FaHIF (jejunum)pH2.5 (median)a, 1.7–3.3 (range)a, 2.3 (median)b, 1.1–7.5 (range)b, 2.0 (median)c, 1.1–3.9, (range)c6.3 (median)a, 5.6–7.0 (range)a, 4.9 (median)b, 1.7–7.6 (range)b6.9 (median)a, 6.5–7.8 (range)a, 5.6 (median)b, 2.2–6.8 (range)bBuffer capacity (mM/ΔpH)17.9 (average)c, 1 to 160 (range)c1.7 (average)d, 0.4–6.3 (range of averages)d2.3 (average)e, 0.3–6.3 (range of averages)e 2 to 13fBuffer concentration (mM)/species~ 0.5–20 mM (range)/HCla6–20 at pH 6.5/bicarbonateg6–20 at pH 6.5/bicarbonategBile salts (mM)a0.28 (median), 0.0 to 0.8 (range)3.25 (median), 2.5–5.9 (range)2.52 (median), 1.4 to 5.5 (range)Phospholipids (mM)a0.029 (median)0.26 (median)0.19 (median)Osmolality (mOsmol)a202 (median), 119 to 221 (range)197 (median), 137–224 (range)280 (median), 200 to 300 (range)Surface tension (mN/m)a36.8 (median), 31 to 45 (range)34–41 (range)25–34 (range)aFrom ref.bFrom refs.cFrom ref.dPersonal communication with author of referenceeFrom ref.fFrom refs.gFrom ref.

Table I

Relevant Properties of Fasted-State Human Gastric Fluid (FaHGF) and Human Intestinal Fluid (FaHIF) (jejunum) that Affect Dissolution

aFrom ref.

bFrom refs.

cFrom ref.

dPersonal communication with author of reference

eFrom ref.

fFrom refs.

gFrom ref.

To address the need for more accurate in vitro/in vivo correlations for the variety of conditions along the GI tract for poorly soluble (i.e., BCS 2 and 4) drug compounds, biorelevant dissolution media (BDM) have been developed. These BDM have evolved significantly with our knowledge of GI physiology (13–19) and include versions representative of fasted and fed states along the entire length of the GI tract (6–8,20,21). These media vary in pH, buffer species, buffer concentration, osmolality, viscosity, and surface tension, as well as the concentration and type of bile components. These media have been shown to accurately predict solubility values measured in aspirated intestinal fluid for many drug substances. While this diversity of available buffers and simulated media enables investigation of the dissolution sensitivity of a compound to medium composition, it can also make selection of the most practical, yet biorelevant, medium challenging for pharmaceutical scientists.

This tutorial describes a methodology for selecting the simplest and most practical BDM expected to provide physiologically relevant in vitro dissolution performance of immediate release (IR) formulations in the upper GI tract (stomach, duodenum, and jejunum) of fasted healthy humans. This section of the GI tract was chosen because it is often where most drug absorption occurs. Our recommendations are designed primarily to guide formulation selection and optimization by screening formulations in media comprising the key physiological parameters expected to impact dissolution. Therefore, these recommendations are suited for biorelevant dissolution testing, which typically commences during early development and may continue through clinical testing and beyond. However, these recommendations can also be useful for development of some quality control (QC) or clinically relevant methods. While in some cases, QC, biorelevant, and clinically relevant dissolution methods may be different, in other cases, a single dissolution method may meet the purpose and requirements of all three.

This tutorial complements other published decision trees in the area of in vitro dissolution testing and is also unique in certain aspects. For example, Andreas and coworkers have published a paper introducing the OrBiTo WP2 Decision Tree, which provides guidance for selecting in vitro methods for aiding oral formulation development of IR, delayed release and extended release formulations (24–28). The decision tree directs the user to different “levels” of dissolution media composition as proposed by Markopolous and coworkers. They present general concepts for medium selection for a range of dosage forms in the fasted and fed GI tract based upon the Developability Classification System (DCS). This tutorial complements the general framework of Markopoulos by giving the reader tools to select a medium based on drug pKa, intrinsic solubility, and log D for IR dosage forms in the fasted state. While this tutorial is most applicable to poorly soluble (i.e., BCS/DCS 2 and 4) compounds, knowing BCS/DCS class is not a prerequisite. In addition, the recommendations differ from Markopolous and coworkers in the selection of buffer capacity. Markopolous defines biorelevant buffer capacity as a BDM with a buffer capacity of the bulk solution within the range of the bulk buffer capacity reported in vivo (i.e., for FaHIF). In contrast, we define biorelevant buffer capacity to be drug property dependent. It refers to the buffer capacity at the surface of the dissolving drug that results in surface pH and dissolution rate similar to that of physiological bicarbonate.

DISSOLUTION MEDIUM SELECTION METHODOLOGY




