
Abstract

In the present study, a novel transformation protocol for Opuntia ficus-indica was generated by means of particle bombardment. The best conditions obtained were: 900 psi rupture disk pressure, 8 cm microprojectile travel distance, and 4 h of exposition to 0.2 M mannitol. For all experiments, gold particles coated with 1.0 µg/µL of pBI426 plasmid DNA were used. With all these conditions, a 23% of transformation efficiency in terms of regeneration in selection media (100 mg/L kanamycin) was obtained. Interestingly, the presence of both transgenes: nptII and uidA, by means of PCR and RT-PCR assays was detected. The regeneration percentage achieved in terms of stable integration for both genes was 10%. In addition, we also detected adequate amounts of β-glucuronidase activity by means of the GUS fluorometric assay. The procedure described in the present investigation reveals the feasibility of using nopal for the introduction, expression, and possible production of heterologous proteins.



Introduction

Nopal (O. ficus-indica) belongs to the Cactaceae family, sub-family Opuntioideae, and constitutes the cactus species with the highest economic importance worldwide. It is grown in America, Africa, Asia, Europe, and Oceania (Angulo-Bejarano and Paredes-López 2012). The number of species belonging to the Opuntia genus may range between 160 (Gibson and Nobel 1986) and 250 (Britton and Rose 1963) and most of them are thought were originated in Mexico. At present, it is considered important for its use as food and forage, and as a source for nutraceuticals (Angulo-Bejarano et al. 2014).

Nopal plants are able to thrive under extremely contrasting environmental conditions, such as poor soils with low pH (Blanco et al. 2003). In addition, they are highly efficient in terms of water usage, mainly due to their CAM metabolism (Herrera 2009). Nopal plants are also characterized for a slow growth due to a long juvenile phase in comparison with asexually propagated material (Silos-Espino et al. 2006). The main meristematic tissue arises from structures called areoles which cover the stems, and that can be stimulated or activated during most in vitro tissue protocols in nopal (Angulo-Bejarano and Paredes-López 2011).

The introduction of new traits in the prickly pear cactus relies on the establishment of gene transfer technologies. In fact, the use of such technologies may aid for increasing nutritional value or in the production of nutraceuticals. A reliable plant genetic transformation system is imperative to allow the use of nopal as a plant bioreactor for the production of commercial or therapeutic molecules. In fact, nopal is a potential candidate to be used as plant bioreactor system due to its capacity to thrive in contrasting environmental conditions and to its high water usage efficiency, among other possibilities (Angulo-Bejarano 2013).

The feasibility for heterologous DNA integration in nopal was formerly described by our research group in 2006, where explants from O. ficus-indica cv. “Villanueva” were utilized and stably transformed by means of Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Silos-Espino et al. 2006). This report demonstrates, apparently for the first time, the use of prickly pear cactus in the expression of recombinant proteins. However, several attempts had been made previously to achieve genetic transformation through particle bombardment in O. ficus-indica. In 1998, Llamoca-Zarate et al. reported particle bombardment on friable calli of nopal cell suspensions. The transient expression of uidA and nptII genes was described, but no stable integration of these genes was registered. In a second attempt, they reported the transient expression of the uidA gene in shoot apical meristems from nopal without evidence for stable foreign DNA integration (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1999a, b). Another study depicted particle bombardment in nopal shoot apical meristems that were transiently transformed to express the uidA and Atahas gene. Nevertheless, no stable integration of the transgene was described (Cruz et al. 2009). Therefore, the aim of the present study was to establish the most suitable conditions for particle bombardment in nopal by means of transient GUS expression and to assess the stable integration of foreign DNA by the molecular analyses.



Discussion

Ideal conditions for particle bombardment in nopal

The genetic transformation of nopal is a very difficult process, as has been reported previously (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1998, 1999a, b, Silos-Espino et al. 2006; Angulo-Bejarano 2013). In particular, genetic transformation by particle bombardment is marked by low efficiency of stably transformed cells, and thus, condition optimization is necessary. In addition, several conditions affect stable transformation in biolistics, namely: mechanical damage, toxicity, and the adjustment of pressure, distance of flight, and type of particles. A balance between minor damage caused by particle bombardment and a high number of cells transiently expressing the transgene is desirable (Chernobrovkina et al. 2007). Our results are not a product of optimization, but rather arise from the search for best particle bombardment conditions for nopal that pursuit high foci formation levels to ensure in part, a much higher number of stably transformed cells.

The previous reports have indicated the influence of helium pressure and target tissue distance on DNA entrance and tissue damage in plant cells (Rubio et al. 2004). In nopal, high-pressure systems using 1200 psi and 7.5 cm in callus and apical cultures led to satisfactory transient expression (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1998, 1999b). However, higher transient expression levels were found in our investigation when applying a lower helium pressure (Table 1; Fig. 2a, b). In fact, at lower pressure, less tissue damage is inflicted (Petrillo et al. 2008). In addition, distance of flight has a very important role in tissue damage and DNA penetration in plants. In our study, when we increased the distance of flight, the GUS transient expression levels were considerably lower than the ones observed when using 8 and 11 cm (Table 1); this may be due to the velocity decrease of the microcarriers that reduces the penetration force and DNA integration (Suratman et al. 2010).

The osmotic treatment prior to particle bombardment is used to reduce cell damage, enhance transient GUS expression, increase stable transformation, and facilitate cell membrane stabilization after transformation (Suratman et al. 2010). The previous studies made in nopal utilized a 12–16-h period of exposition prior to particle bombardment, but the osmotic agent was not described (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1999b). This differs consistently with our findings (Table 1), since, when the exposition time was increased, we found a statistically significant decrease (α = 0.05) in foci production.

Transgene copy number is influenced by the amount of DNA used for every bombardment, and thus, single-copy integration is favored when lower amounts of DNA are loaded into microcarriers (Lowe et al. 2009). This is in agreement with our results. The highest GUS transient expression was observed when using 1.0 µg/µL (Table 1; Fig. 2c). This was also observed in plant species like tomato (Camacho-Beltrán 2008). Unfortunately, the previous reports in nopal particle bombardment do not describe which plasmid DNA concentration was used (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1998, 1999b). On the other hand, limiting the DNA amount used for particle bombardment results in fewer DNA molecules covering an individual particle (Lowe et al. 2009). This coincides with our results, where the use of 0.5 µg/µL resulted in less foci production when compared with the use of 1.0 µg/µL. Interestingly, when a DNA concentration of 1.5 µg/µL was used, we did not observe a higher level of foci production (Table 1).

Gold and tungsten particles differ in their ability to generate foci and stable transformation events due to their overall shape, penetration depth, toxicity, and foci formation size (Altpeter et al. 2005; Rivera et al. 2012). In the present study, gold particles gave a higher number of blue spots per explants (Table 1; Fig. 2d). The low levels of transient GUS expression in the tungsten bombarded explants could be due to a toxic effect (Rivera et al. 2012). Since nopal tissue architecture is more complex, this could prevent the penetration of tungsten particles into deeper cell layers, thereby generating a lower transient GUS expression level. Nevertheless, in the previous reports, tungsten particles of 1.3 µm diameter were used during the particle bombardment of nopal apical meristems, generating acceptable results in terms of transient GUS expression (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1999b). Similar results to the ones reported here were registered in Jatropha curcas, where the use of 900 psi and 0.6 µm gold particles generated a higher survival percentage in bombarded tissues (Joshi et al. 2011).

The type and concentration of the osmotic agent may increase the transient gene expression by reducing the turgor pressure in cells, helping to increase the survival probability of the cells by avoiding cell rupture after the blast generated from the bombardment (Rosillo et al. 2003). The positive effect of using mannitol and combinations with sorbitol has already been reported in plant systems such as watermelon (Suratman et al. 2010) and coffee (Gatica et al. 2009). Even though the use of mannitol generated positive results in foci formation (Table 1), the sorbitol + mannitol treatment and the maltose + sorbitol + mannitol treatment did not generate any synergic effect that could enhance GUS expression. However, the results presented here are far higher than the ones reported by Llamoca-Zarate et al. (1999b). In other words, we report 197 positive GUS events (only for the mannitol 0.2 M treatment) versus 35 reported by that research group. In brief, the results presented here may be regarded as robust and allowed the establishment of nopal particle bombardment conditions by means of transient expression; such conditions are: a distance of flight to the target tissue of 8 cm; a helium pressure of 900 psi, a pre-conditioning period for the nopal explants of 4 h prior to the bombardment using 0.2 M mannitol as the osmotic agent, and the utilization of gold particles as microcarriers on which 1 µg/µL of plasmid DNA is previously loaded.

Stable nopal genetic transformation by particle bombardment

Particle bombardment constitutes an alternative method for gene transfer in those cases where the other methods are not efficient, since it may facilitate DNA delivery into intact plant cells with no biological constraints or host limitations (Tassy et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2018). With our transformation protocol, we obtained a 23% of transformation efficiency and survival on selection medium which is higher than the ones reported for the other plant species such as marigold that was 1% (Vanegas-Espinoza et al. 2006), 8% for A. tequilana (Valenzuela-Sánchez 2006), and 1.8% for tomato (Camacho-Beltrán 2008). In addition, when we compared the results obtained with plant models more closely related to nopal, we found that the overall biolistic transformation efficiency in nopal was higher than the one previously registered for Aloe vera (8.7%) (Velchevá et al. 2010). Interestingly, our results are close to the ones reported for Rhipsalidopsis gaertner (22.7%) after A. tumefaciens genetic transformation (Al-Ramamneh et al. 2006).

In addition, Llamoca-Zarate et al. (1998, 1999b) reported transient GUS expression in nopal explants after particle bombardment; nevertheless, they never achieved stable genetic transformation or regeneration of the transformed explants. In addition, Cruz et al. reported 4% transformation efficiency by biolistics in nopal apical tissues. However, no stable integration of the transgene was demonstrated. Furthermore, Silos-Espino et al. achieved a 3.2% rate of genetic transformation efficiency in O. ficus-indica cv. Villanueva transformed by means of A. tumefaciens. However, the results presented here by the biolistics process are consistently higher. This could be due to the fact that the nopal transformation by the A. tumefaciens method presents some serious difficulties. Experiments to establish O. ficus-indica cv. Blanco sin Espinas genetic transformation by means of A. tumefaciens infection were conducted, with no positive results (data not shown). In fact, Karami et al. described that, when using the A. tumefaciens, gene transfer can be very different within the same plant species, even at the cultivar level. Therefore, the particle bombardment method established in nopal presents advantages, since one should not have to overcome plant-related issues such as those involved in the A. tumefaciens method.

Transgene integration assessment in nopal stable transformants

Stable integration of the transgene into the plant genome by different genetic transformation protocols remains a very difficult task. One of the main disadvantages associated with the biolistics gene transfer method is related to the co-suppression phenomenon or transgene rearrangements that can prevent transgene integration, limit its proper expression, or inhibit the production of the foreign protein (Lowe et al. 2009). Thus, obtaining positive results in terms of transgene expression in nopal explants may be considered a very important step. With the method described previously, we were capable of detecting the integration of both nptII and uidA transgenes by means of PCR, in all the transformed samples (Fig. 3a, b). Other reports made in nopal with biolistics were able to detect only the transient GUS expression without demonstrating the stable integration of the transgene into the plant genome (Llamoca-Zarate et al. 1998, 1999b). However, the sole report that had previously demonstrated the capacity of nopal for the introduction of transgenes was published by Silos-Espino et al.. In this case, the stable integration of the nptII gene was demonstrated by PCR and Southern blot hybridization. On the other hand, our method allowed the expression of these transgene transcripts as revealed by the RT-PCR analysis of transformed materials (Fig. 4c, d), therefore demonstrating the capacity of this plant to express heterologous transgenes. However, this happened in a slightly unexpected way, as 10 out of 10 samples revealed the expression of the ntpII transgene, while only 8 out of 10 revealed the expression of the uidA gene. No information is yet available for the nopal gene silencing machinery; however, we can deduct from the results obtained, that this behavior may be due to a co-suppression event that caused the “turning off” of the uidA transgene in this plant or maybe to transgene rearrangements during RNA transcription (Lowe et al. 2009).

Stable expression and production of proteins in nopal was analyzed by a GUS fluorescent assay. The values obtained in this report were in average 30 4MU/min/mg protein which were consistently lower than the ones detected in the control sample (commercial β-glucuronidase). Thus, this constitutes apparently the first report indicating the feasibility of using a very complicated plant for the introduction of foreign DNA into the plant genome and, in the last instance, the production of heterologous proteins.
