
Abstract

Phosphoglucomutase (PGM) is a key enzyme in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, regulating both glycogen and trehalose metabolism in insects. In this study, we explored the potential function of phosphoglucomutase (PGM) using RNA interference technology in Nilaparvata lugens, the brown planthopper. PGM1 and PGM2 were found highly expressed in the midgut of brown planthoppers, with different expression levels in different instar nymphs. The glycogen, glucose, and trehalose levels were also significantly increased after brown planthoppers were injected with dsRNA targeting PGM1 (dsPGM1) or PGM2 (dsPGM2). In addition, injection of dsPGM1 or dsPGM2 resulted in increased membrane-bound trehalase activity but not soluble trehalase activity. Furthermore, the expression of genes related to trehalose and glycogen metabolism decreased significantly after injection with dsPGM1 and dsPGM2. The expression levels of genes involved in chitin metabolism in the brown planthopper were also significantly decreased and the insects showed wing deformities and difficulty molting following RNAi. We suggest that silencing of PGM1 and PGM2 expression directly inhibits trehalose metabolism, leading to impaired chitin synthesis.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-020-2053-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is the most important cereal crop in China. However, rice is threatened by various pests during production and storage, among which Nilaparvata lugens Stål (brown planthopper) is one of the most harmful (Zhang et al. 2017b; Boddupally et al. 2018). N. lugens can directly damage rice and spread various rice viral diseases, such as rice grass and rice ragged stunts (Cheng et al. 2013). Most rice production relies on the use of chemical insecticides to control brown planthoppers which inevitably causes environmental pollution. In addition, the use of pesticides also kills the natural predators of brown planthopper and can induce resistance, eventually leading to their resurgence of crop disease (Becker et al. 1996; Tanaka et al. 2000; Nauen and Denholm 2005; Bottrell and Schoenly 2012).

Carbohydrate metabolism is important central because it is a bridge to biosynthetic pathways for proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and secondary metabolites. Trehalose plays a very important role in the development and physiological activities of insects as an important sugar in haemolymphs (Zhang et al. 2017b; Becker et al. 1996; Elbein et al. 2003; Tang et al. 2010). Glycogen is also another important metabolite (Tolmasky et al. 2001; Liu et al. 2009), which is mainly synthesised and stored in fat bodies. Glycogen can be rapidly converted into trehalose and glucose in other tissues when insects need a supply of energy (Tang et al. 2012). The enzyme phosphoglucomutase (PGM) plays a key role in the interconversion of trehalose and glycogen in insects.

PGM is a conserved enzyme, ubiquitous in animals, plants, and microorganisms catalysing the interconversion of glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P) and glucose-1-phosphate (G-1-P) (Jin et al. 2018; Egli et al. 2010; Stray-Pedersen et al. 2014; Weyler and Heinzle 2015; Liu 2013). Because glucose-6-phosphate is an important central metabolite, PGM plays an important role in the metabolism of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids and is key for the development of plants (Egli et al. 2010; Paparelli et al. 2013; Malinova et al. 2014) and some microorganisms (Liu 2013). In humans, there are four PGM isoenzymes namely PGM1, PGM2, PGM3, and PGM5, which are encoded by different genes (Jin et al. 2018).

At present, there are few studies investigating PGMs in insects or invertebrates. Because PGM controls the interconversion between G-6-P and G-1-P, which is the only way to convert trehalose into glycogen, PGM has an important role in trehalose and glycogen metabolism in the brown planthopper. In this study, we further explore the role of PGM in trehalose and glycogen metabolism. A greater understanding of the role of PGM will enable its potential use as a new target for green insecticides.



Discussion

According to sequence analysis, PGM1 and PGM2 are highly conserved among different insects, and they are also highly conserved during evolution (Figs. S2, S3). As we all known, PGM catalyses the interconversion of (G-1-P) and (G-6-P). G-1-P is an important intermediate in the metabolism of glycogen, galactose, glycoproteins, and glycolipids; therefore, PGM is involved in a variety of cellular functions (Hakomori 1985; Gahmberg and Hakomori 1973; Novelli and Reichardt 2000). G-6-P is a central, metabolite, part of glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway, providing precursors for anabolic pathways and cofactors required for cell proliferation (Ward and Thompson 2012). PGM is widely found in animals, plants, and microorganisms and is distributed in almost all tissues (Egli et al. 2010; Stray-Pedersen et al. 2014; Weyler and Heinzle 2015). In the brown planthopper, both PGM1 and PGM2 were most highly expressed in the midgut, followed by the foot (Fig. 1c, d). While the role of PGM in the intestine is likely related to nutrient intake and utilisation and heterogeneous metabolism (insecticide metabolism) (Bao et al. 2012), we speculate that PGM may also play an important role in substance metabolism in the brown planthopper. Given that the PGM1 and PGM2 genes are highly expressed on the first day of the fifth instar and on the first day of the adult (Fig. 1a, b), PGM1 and PGM2 may play an important role in chitin synthesis.

RNAi technology has become an effective tool in the research of insect gene function, gene expression regulation, pest control, and new pesticide development (Lou et al. 2018; Han et al. 2018). Although the brown planthopper is an agricultural pest, it is also a desirable model insect to study gene function (Xi et al. 2015a, b). We used RNAi technology to explore the role of PGM in regulating the metabolism of trehalose and glycogen in the brown planthopper. To verify the specificity and effectiveness of dsPGM1 and dsPGM2 for RNAi, we first examined the relative expression levels of PGM1 and PGM2 after injection with dsPGM1 and dsPGM2, respectively. We found that the relative expression levels of PGM1 and PGM2 were significantly decreased after RNAi injection (P < 0.01). In addition, the PGM1 levels were relatively unaffected after PGM2 knockdown, whereas the PGM2 expression levels were significantly decreased after PGM1 knockdown (Fig. 2). This suggests that the expression level of PGM1 may affect the expression level of PGM2.

Trehalose is the blood sugar in insects and critical for insect growth, development, and molting (Elbein 1974; Elbein et al. 2003; Tang et al. 2014). Glycogen is an important energy store. The expression levels of the genes involved in trehalose and glycogen metabolism were significantly down-regulated after the PGM1 knocking down (Fig. 3a). Although some genes were unaffected by the knockdown of PGM2, others showed a slight down-regulation (Fig. 3b). The trehalose content was significantly increased after the dsPGM1 injection, but no significant effect was observed after the dsPGM2 injection (Fig. 4). This is consistent with the extremely low expression levels of the TRE genes and a significant increase of expression in the TPS2 gene following the dsPGM1 injection (Fig. 3). Previous studies have shown that when different types of TRE genes are knocked down, the changes in trehalose content are different (Yang et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2010), which may explain why the trehalose content differs after injection of dsPGM1 compared to dsPGM2.

The glucose levels were also significantly increased after injection of both dsPGM1 and dsPGM2 (Fig. 4). This is consistent with the several-fold higher expression level of G6Pase compared to the expression level of HK, even though HK and G6Pase were both suppressed by dsPGM1 and dsPGM2 (Fig. 3). Studies have shown that knockdown of the HR38 gene in Aedes aegypti can block transcriptional activation of the CM gene encoding PGM and TPS, resulting in increased glycogen accumulation (Dong et al. 2018). Here, we also found that the levels of glycogen in the brown planthopper were significantly increased after injection of dsPGM1 and dsPGM2 (Fig. 4). Trehalose and trehalase activity are key for the regulation of various physiological processes in insects (Ge et al. 2011). Membrane-bound trehalase activity was significantly increased after dsPGM1 or dsPGM2 injection, whereas soluble trehalase activity was not significantly altered (Fig. 5). These results indicate that PGM1 and PGM2 may have greater effect on membrane-bound trehalase than on the soluble form of the enzyme.

An increasing number of studies have shown that trehalose metabolism can regulate the synthesis of chitin through trehalose synthase and trehalose hydrolase (Tang et al. 2010; Shukla et al. 2015; Shi et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2017). Knockdown of the TRE gene in the brown planthopper caused clear deformities in the wings and difficulty in molting, indicating that trehalose has a direct effect on chitin synthesis (Zhang et al. 2017a). Abnormal synthesis of chitin has also been observed in the brown planthopper after knockdown of the TPS gene (Yang et al. 2017). In this study, both the TPS and TRE genes were affected to some degree after knockdown of the PGM1 or PGM2 genes; therefore, we further tested the effect of PGM1 or PGM2 knockdowns on chitin synthesis. The expression of most of the genes involved in chitin synthesis were significantly decreased after dsPGM1 or dsPGM2 injection (Fig. 6a, b), and there were different degrees of deformity (Fig. 6c), suggesting that silencing the PGM1 or PGM2 genes can inhibit the expression of chitin synthase (CHS), resulting in the inability of the brown planthopper to synthesise chitin. Recently, in a study in the A. pisum nymph, knockdown of A. pisum CHS was found to disrupt embryonic development, leading to difficulty in molting (Ye et al. 2019). Another study in whitebacked planthoppers showed malformations and high mortality after CHS1, CHS1a, and CHS1b knockdown (Wang et al. 2019). These studies demonstrate that CHS plays a pivotal role in chitin synthesis, which is consistent with our results.
