


Introduction

Chemical fertilizer (CF) significantly increases the yield of crops and has majorly contributed to the green revolution in the twentieth century. However, the mismanagement of inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus inputs is a well-known inefficiency that has posed a threat to the environment (Martínez-Alcántara et al. 2016). Organic fertilizer (OF) has been recently used as substitutes for CF because of they are environmentally friendly. In addition, OF offer an obvious advantage of improving carbon sequestration, pH balance, cation/anion retention, and microbial communities in soil (Zhang et al. 2011). In comparison with CF, OF can regulate soil properties and improve the production of several crops (Liu et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2016a).

Soil microorganisms form complicated microbial communities that regulate the nutrient cycles and influence soil characteristics, plant growth, and ecosystem sustainability (van der Heijden et al. 2008). Bacteria are the most abundant group of soil microorganisms. The determination of soil bacteria is important to understand the bacterial diversity and community composition. Phospholipid fatty acids profiling and 16S rDNA fingerprinting are the key strategies employed for the exploration of soil bacterial communities (Agnelli et al. 2004). With the recent development in second-generation sequencing technologies, high-throughput sequencing has offered great advantages in determining soil microbial diversity and community composition (Kozich et al. 2013; Varma et al. 2018).

The rubber tree is an indigenous species of Amazon rainforests and serves as the sole source of natural rubber for the industry. The secondary laticifers located in the inner bark of rubber tree are the site for natural rubber biosynthesis and storage (Hao and Wu 2000). Latex, or the cytoplasm of laticifers, contains 20–40% rubber for natural rubber refinement. During natural rubber production, latex is collected by severing the laticifer rings every 2–3 days (Chao et al. 2017). The natural rubber yield per tree has significantly grown in the past 100 years, mainly due to variety selection and fertilizer application (Tang et al. 2013). Rubber plantations have become an important ecosystem in tropical areas such as Southeast Asia, Latin America, etc. (Dechner et al. 2018). Although soil bacterial communities of rubber plantations across seasons and chronosequence have been previously reported (Zhou et al. 2017; Lan et al. 2018), their response to different fertilizer treatments is poorly understood. Moreover, the physical properties of natural rubber make the degradation of waste rubber products difficult (Shah et al. 2012). Microbial degradation of natural rubber is an environmentally friendly way, and more than 100 rubber-degrading bacteria have been identified in the past decades (Luo et al. 2014). In the present study, we systematically investigated the effects of CF and OF–CF on natural rubber yield, soil properties, and soil bacterial community composition, and provided some recommendations for the use of OF to improve soil fertility in rubber plantations. Several possible rubber-degrading operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were further discussed.


