
Abstract

The study of weak or colloidal interactions of therapeutic proteins in different formulations allows prediction and optimization of protein stability. Various biophysical techniques have been applied to determine the second osmotic virial coefficient B2 as it reflects on the macromolecular distance distribution that governs solution behavior at high concentration. In the present work, we exploit a direct link predicted by hydrodynamic theory between B2 and the nonideality of sedimentation, commonly measured in sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation through the nonideality coefficient of sedimentation, kS. Using sedimentation equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation for independent measurement of B2, we have examined the dependence of kS on B2 for model proteins in different buffers. The data exhibit the expected linear relationship and highlight the impact of protein shape on the magnitude of the nonideality coefficient kS. Recently, measurements of kS have been considerably simplified allowing higher throughput and simultaneous polydispersity assessment at higher protein concentrations. Thus, sedimentation velocity may offer a useful approach to compare the impact of formulation conditions on weak interactions and simultaneously on higher-order structure of therapeutic proteins.



INTRODUCTION

Protein pharmaceuticals are a rapidly expanding class of therapeutics. In particular, monoclonal antibody products have found broad application with an increasing number of targets (1–3). One of the challenges is the development of formulations that provide colloidal stability, low solution viscosity, and ensure the absence of immunogenic aggregates at very high protein concentrations (4–7). Therefore, techniques that can assess both the formation of higher-order structure and measure weak particle interactions are of great interest in this field. In particular, it has been shown that the second virial coefficient B2 can correlate with aggregation, viscosity, solubility, and liquid-liquid phase separation (8–15). Techniques used to measure B2 include small angle scattering, static light scattering (SLS), sedimentation equilibrium (SE) and sedimentation velocity (SV) analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC), self-interaction chromatography, osmometry, and dynamic light scattering (DLS) in combination with SV (9,13,15–26).

Unfortunately, measurement of the second osmotic virial coefficient is challenging with any technique, and difficulties are exacerbated by sample polydispersity. For example, SLS is a very attractive method due to the ability to measure solutions at very high concentrations, even beyond the range where B2 alone is sufficient to describe the concentration-dependent behavior and more precise analyses are necessary. On the other hand, SLS signals are highly sensitive to trace aggregates and impurities of larger size, which may be encountered in concentrated solutions. Another light scattering approach is DLS, where the change in mutual diffusion coefficient D with concentration c can be measured through the nonideality coefficient of diffusion, kD. As has been pointed out by Saluja and colleagues, through analysis of the autocorrelation function in DLS, it is possible to discriminate and exclude signals from large particles that would dominate SLS measurements. However, a caveat is that this does not work for oligomers and smaller aggregates that cannot be resolved in DLS, and that strictly the basic foundations of polydispersity analysis in DLS break down in the presence of hydrodynamic interactions. Conflicting results were reported from experiments probing the theoretically expected linear relationship between the nonideality coefficient of diffusion, kD and B2. While Ghosh et al. observed poor correlation between kD by DLS and B2 by SLS, two other studies report good correlations. However, the relationship was not considered universal but molecular shape dependent.

The nonideality coefficient of diffusion and the second virial coefficient are intimately linked to the nonideality coefficient of sedimentation, kS, as measured from the decreasing sedimentation velocity with higher concentrations, through the simple relationship kD = 2B2–kS (considering B2 in volume/weight units; analogous to B2′M with a second virial coefficient B2′ in molar units). Thus, the combination of DLS to measure kD and SV to measure kS has been used to determine B2.

Previous work in this field has not yet made use of the result from statistical fluid dynamics that hydrodynamic interactions that govern kS are directly dependent on the interparticle distance distribution, in a way that establishes a direct link between the reduction of sedimentation in nonideal solutions and the second virial coefficient without reference to diffusion nonideality (33–37). The question whether this can be exploited for weakly interacting proteins and to what extent shape-dependent (i.e., protein-dependent) parameters need to be considered in the interpretation of kS is examined in the present work. Examining weak interactions through nonideal SV seems attractive because, independently, SV is already widely used to quantitate the presence of immunogenic oligomers and higher-order structures in formulations of therapeutic proteins, orthogonal to chromatographic and other methods (29,38–41).

This problem gains more practical relevance since we have recently introduced a new method to determine nonideality coefficients of sedimentation simultaneous with high-resolution size distributions from single experimental data sets, which eliminates the need to run samples at multiple concentrations for determining kS. The new method also increases the concentration limits for the quantitation of trace oligomers and aggregates by SV, providing information on higher-order structures closer to formulation conditions from the same experiment. Furthermore, we have recently shown that weak macromolecular self-association can be measured with this approach. In parallel, alternative detection modes and the use of 3D printing technology in the development of new centerpieces can enhance the throughput and reduce sample requirements of SV (manuscript submitted). Therefore, we believe the measurement of nonideality coefficients kS by SV can be an attractive approach for the efficient characterization of weak interactions and higher-order structure of therapeutic proteins in different formulation conditions.


