
Abstract

Thorough exploration of alternative dosing frequencies is often not performed in conventional pharmacometrics approaches. Quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP) can provide novel insights into optimal dosing regimen and drug behaviors which could add a new dimension to the design of novel treatments. However, methods for such an approach are currently lacking. Recently, we illustrated the utility of frequency-domain response analysis (FdRA), an analytical method used in control engineering, using several generic pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic case studies. While FdRA is not applicable to models harboring ever increasing variables such as those describing tumor growth, studying such models in the frequency domain provides valuable insight into optimal dosing frequencies. Through the analysis of three distinct tumor growth models (cell cycle-specific, metronomic, and acquired resistance), we demonstrate the application of a simulation-based analysis in the frequency domain to optimize cancer treatments. We study the response of tumor growth to dosing frequencies while simultaneously examining treatment safety, and found for all three models that above a certain dosing frequency, tumor size is insensitive to an increase in dosing frequency, e.g., for the cell cycle-specific model, one dose per 3 days, and an hourly dose yield the same reduction of tumor size to 3% of the initial size after 1 year of treatment. Additionally, we explore the effect of drug elimination rate changes on the tumor growth response. In summary, we show that the frequency-domain view of three models of tumor growth dynamics can help in optimizing drug dosing regimen to improve treatment success.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0372-4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

In clinical pharmacology, treatment regimen are usually defined by drug dose, dosing interval, and treatment duration. Because the success of drug interventions heavily depends on drug administration schedules, the high rate of late-stage attrition in clinical development can be attributed partly to sub-optimal dosing regimen selection . Often, dose and dosing schedule are determined through pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic (PKPD) model simulations . In quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP), such PKPD models are combined with mechanistic systems biology and/or disease models . Such mechanistic models have long been used to describe and predict various aspects in oncology [5–7], from the underlying biological mechanisms [8–10] to tumor growth . While QSP is increasingly utilized in anti-cancer drug discovery and development , only a few examples exist where it has been applied to optimize drug dosing and scheduling to predict tumor responses, efficacy, and toxicity . Control theory methods, but almost exclusively optimal control theory, have been used to optimize dosing regimen ; however, the range of analyzed regimen has been limited. Primarily, optimal control theory served as a method to optimize dose [19–21]. Fister and Panetta , for example, used optimal control theory on a model of cell cycle-specific bone marrow growth to determine effective administrations of a chemotherapeutic agent while maximizing bone marrow mass and the drug dose over the treatment interval.

However, there has been little systematic effort in determining the influence of dosing frequency on treatment success by using PKPD models. To approach this gap, we recently published a tutorial for pharmacologists on frequency-domain response analysis (FdRA), an analytical method commonly used in systems and control engineering . QSP models relate inputs such as the plasma concentration of a drug or a schedule of drug administrations to outputs such as the effect of a drug. Because these key variables typically vary in time, QSP models are often based on differential equations. The time scales on which they act can differ significantly, from drug-receptor binding happening within seconds to tumor growth over the course of years. Similarly, disturbances of dynamic biological systems, such as drug interventions, can span multiple time scales as well. FdRA provides a framework for analyzing how such disturbances on various time scales affect dynamic systems by focusing on the change of the harmonic content (i.e., frequency, amplitude, and phase) of an input signal when it is passed to the output, rather than its temporal evolution. Additionally, in combination with (preclinical) high-throughput dose-exposure-response experimentation, FdRA allows for the identification of a system’s structure describing, e.g., the dynamic connection between dose and response without requiring prior biological or pharmacological knowledge . FdRA, however, requires a model to be linear or at least linearizable around a stable steady state. Consequently, FdRA is not applicable to models that do not possess a stable steady state because they, for example, contain monotonically increasing variables as present in tumor growth models. Nevertheless, we demonstrated earlier that non-linear models and their linearization’s lead to comparable frequency responses .

Here, we present a simulation study that is heavily inspired by FdRA in that it shifts the focus away from the traditionally used time domain towards the frequency domain with the aim to find the frequency response behavior of three models of tumor growth to chemotherapeutic treatment, and so to suggest optimal dosing regimen.

The three selected models capture essential aspects of chemotherapy, namely the cell cycle specificity and the anti-angiogenic effects as well as the development of resistance to chemotherapeutic agents (Fig. 1). Cell cycle-specific chemotherapy has been well-studied with the help of mathematical models . Dibrov et al., for example, studied the frequency dependence of cell cycle-dependent chemotherapy with the help of (optimal) control theory methods already more than 40 years ago . While they included a drug concentration dependence in their model, pharmacokinetics (PK) is not fully incorporated. Similarly, Agur et al. modeled cell cycle kinetics in normal and tumor tissue to optimize pulsatile dosing without the inclusion of PK. And lastly, also Bernard et al. studied the impact of variations of tumor cell kinetics on anti-cancer chronotherapy without the addition of a PK model. Here, we use a cell cycle-specific model (CCSM) that divides human tumor cells into proliferating cells in G1, S, G2, or M phase and quiescent cells in G0 phase of the cell cycle . It is, furthermore, coupled to a two-compartmental PK model of etoposide and a myelosuppression model to predict toxicities . Metronomic chemotherapy, and anti-angiogenesis as its main mode of action, is well studied from a theoretical perspective as well [33–36]. With the help of a mathematical model, Mpekris et al., for example, found that metronomic chemotherapy improves the vascular perfusion of tumor tissue which resulted in improved drug delivery and higher tumor cell kill rates . The metronomic model (MM) used in this article combines a PK model of temozolomide with a tumor growth model that contains a description of the anti‐angiogenic effect, and a model of myelosuppression . The prevention of resistance to anti-cancer therapies with the optimization of dosing schedules has been excessively examined using mathematical models [39–41]. Here, we analyze a murine PKPD model of acquired resistance (ARM) of tumor cells in response to erlotinib or gefitinib treatment .Fig. 1Model structures. For the three models (CCSM, MM, and ARM), the model structures are shown. Green and red arrows denote stimulation and inhibition, respectively. Model variables are abbreviated as the following: D is the drug dose; AA, AC, AP are the drug concentrations in the absorption, central, and peripheral compartments, respectively; P and Q represent proliferating and quiescent cancer cells; EC and EA are the effect compartment for cancer cells and the anti-angiogenic effect, respectively; C and A are the cancer cells and the anti-angiogenic effect, respectively; NP and NC represent proliferating and circulating neutrophils, respectively; S represents sensitive cells; T1 to T3 are cells in different stages of damage; R is the resistant cells

Fig. 1

Model structures. For the three models (CCSM, MM, and ARM), the model structures are shown. Green and red arrows denote stimulation and inhibition, respectively. Model variables are abbreviated as the following: D is the drug dose; AA, AC, AP are the drug concentrations in the absorption, central, and peripheral compartments, respectively; P and Q represent proliferating and quiescent cancer cells; EC and EA are the effect compartment for cancer cells and the anti-angiogenic effect, respectively; C and A are the cancer cells and the anti-angiogenic effect, respectively; NP and NC represent proliferating and circulating neutrophils, respectively; S represents sensitive cells; T1 to T3 are cells in different stages of damage; R is the resistant cells

We study the response of each of these three tumor growth models to different dosing frequencies, the interplay of PK and dosing regimen on treatment success, and the optimal treatment modality to maximize tumor reduction while limiting toxicities. Not surprisingly, we find that PK significantly impacts the success of treatment; however, the frequency-domain view identifies previously unknown deviations from conventional dosing regimen. Additionally, we suggest modified drug elimination rates for next-generation compounds that would lead to optimal tumor reduction with acceptable toxicity.

Thus, we show that analyzing QSP models in the frequency domain not only provides insights into the dynamics of tumor growth and their response to repetitive treatments, but also allows to detect optimal dosing regimen for given drug behaviors.



DISCUSSION

By numerically studying three models of tumor growth and treatment effects that capture essential aspects of chemotherapy, we unraveled their response behavior to chemotherapeutic treatment in the frequency domain.

For the cell cycle-specific model, we found that even though more frequent dose administration is favorable to tumor reduction, it also results in a sustained reduction of ANC levels while less frequent etoposide administration allows for a strong ANC recovery. This trade-off between efficacy and safety was also observed by Andersen and Mackey who investigated resonance in periodic chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia, and found that this type of intervention is unlikely to be efficacious because tumor cells seem to be favored over bone marrow cells in terms of depletion and regrowth rate. Through adaptation of PK, we furthermore found an etoposide-like drug with a reduced elimination would rather accelerate tumor reduction while still residing within the therapeutic window. This suggests that a mid-frequency dosing regimen might be optimal when describing tumor growth with a cell cycle-specific model.

The metronomic model, although specifically developed for frequent low-dose drug administrations, is not able to confirm this treatment regimen but on the contrary suggests that infrequent treatments should be preferred in terms of tumor reduction and toxicity. While maximum tumor reduction might be achieved for four temozolomide administrations per week, ANC levels below 10% are not a tolerable adverse effect. However, a temozolomide-like therapeutic agent with an increased elimination rate that is administered only every 2 months results in fast tumor reduction with only mild toxicities. In line with the here presented conclusions, two studies of anti-angiogenic chemotherapy, however without PK, investigated the treatment frequency and concluded that the efficacy of metronomic therapy depends the interplay of the vascular contribution to tumor growth and the anti-angiogenic effect of the therapy . This confirms the importance and impact of dosing frequency on the success of metronomic chemotherapy. We, furthermore, showed how explicit or approximate analytical analysis can deepen the insight gained from a model, especially with respect to dosing frequencies.

As expected, in the model of acquired resistance, the resistant cells quickly dominate the sensitive cells, irrespective of drug or species. However, the subtle differences in tumor development and resistant cell behavior can be explained by the different model-inherent drug plasma concentration thresholds above which the drugs also affect resistant cells (Supplementary Table S3). Additionally, drug-specific PK parameters are responsible for the different responses of the model to dosing frequency changes. Therefore, reduction of the elimination rates by two orders of magnitude is the only option to combat resistance and achieve tumor reduction while the dosing frequency seems to have only a minor impact.

By looking at the input/output behavior of all three models through the amplitude ratio between tumor cell count/mass/volume and drug plasma concentration, we found that the amplitude ratios of all models stay below 1, which means that the tumor growth models attenuate plasma fluctuations before they are passed to the tumor response. In other words, the amount of tumor tissue always fluctuates less than the amount of drug in plasma. Furthermore, because all amplitude ratios stay within one order of magnitude, we reason that dosing frequency does not significantly alter the relationship between plasma concentration and tumor fluctuations.

Here, it should also be noted that FdRA only allows for periodic and symmetric dosing regimen where the dose for each treatment as well as the dose administration interval is the same. That this might not always lead to the optimal treatment modalities was recently highlighted by Chmielecki et al. . They used an evolutionary model of non-small cell lung cancer to predict that high-dose pulses combined with continuous low-dose tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as gefitinib or erlotinib delay the emergence of resistance. This prediction was, however, later refuted in a phase 1 clinical study that found no improvement of progression free survival or prevention of the emergence of resistance . Nevertheless, non-symmetric dosing regimen were also found to optimize treatment outcome in patients with metastatic breast cancer or non-small-cell lung cancer. Traina et al. studied the reduction of consecutive oral capecitabine treatment days from 14 to 7 followed by a 7-day rest period based on simulations of a Norton-Simon growth kinetic model. Similarly, in one of the few studies combining PK with the development of acquired resistance, Foo et al. concluded that administration of erlotinib in high-dose pulses with low-dose continuous therapy minimized the development of resistance.

The importance of optimizing dosing regimen also extends into immunotherapy or targeted anti-cancer therapy, such as EGFR inhibition. Sachs et al. exemplified that for targeted therapeutics such as monoclonal antibodies or immunotherapies that might not exhibit dose-limiting toxicities, conventional maximum tolerated dose derived first-in-human dosing needs an alternative dosing strategy such as biologically efficacious dose. More specifically, a PKPD coupled tumor uptake model for immunocytokine-based cancer immunotherapy predicted that dose-dense administration schedules improve intratumoral drug uptake . For brain tumors, however, it was found that lapatinib should be administered on a continuous daily schedule while the time intervals between PCV (Procarbazine, CCNU, and Vincristine) chemotherapy cycles should be increased .
