
Abstract

Modern dental treatment with standard screw-type implants leave some cases unaddressed in patients with extreme jaw bone resorption. Custom-made subperiosteal dental implant could be an alternative treatment modality to sinus lift, nerve lateralization or zygomatic implant techniques. Subperiosteal dental implants were utilized for many years to treat such patients. A combination of traditional subperiosteal implant designs with current advancements in 3D imaging, design and printing allow to reduces treatment time and provides abutments for prostheses in cases where other techniques do not provide satisfactory results. The data manipulation and design software are important aspects in the manufacturing of custom implants. Programs that are specialized for industrial or medical design typically cost tens of thousands of US dollars. In this work I establish and test steps for design and production of a custom medical device (subperiosteal implant) from patient computed tomography (CT) data. Work stages to be defined are: selection of necessary software, CT data processing, 3D virtual model creation, modeling technique for custom implant and data file preparation for printing. Patient CT data was successfully converted into a watertight STL (Standard Tessellation Language) model of the maxilla. Error corrections and design were completed using freely available programs from Autodesk Inc.. The implant was produced in Ti64 (a type 5 titanium alloy) using three-dimensional (3D) printing DMLS (direct metal laser sintering) process. The avoidance of high cost software makes this treatment modality more accessible to smaller clinics or mid-size production facilities and subsequently more available to patients.



Introduction

As populations age, the need for dental treatment of partially or fully edentulous patients increases. Nowadays, seniors often are socially and physically active and expect a high quality of life. One important aspect of such quality of life is healthy dentition, or at least non-removable teeth prostheses. Dental treatment plans often include implant placement, which in turn requires sufficient bone quantity. However, elderly people usually do not have the amount of bone required for standard root form implant placement. Moreover, elderly patients are poor candidates for bone augmentation due to their decreased metabolic rate and decreased regenerative capacity . When bone augmentation is not possible, implant placement is no longer an option.

Thus, dental professionals are faced with demands for different solutions to restore dentition with non-removable teeth prostheses.

Subperiosteal dental implantation, a conservative option for implant treatment of severely resorbed maxilla and mandible, has existed for quite a long time. It was first introduced by doctor Gustav Dhal in 1937 in Sweden . Nowadays, with advances in regenerative medicine, this option has all but been forgotten by the dental community, even though it could be an effective and useful option in the treatment of patients with heavily resorbed jaws.Conventionally, this implant is produced in two stages (involving two surgeries). During the first surgery, an impression is taken of the jaw bone. Then, a custom subperiosteal implant is made in the laboratory and placed on the jaw bone in a second operation. However, patients are not very receptive of this kind of two-stage surgery for elective treatments.

With the advent of computed tomography (CT) and freeform fabrication techniques (such as stereo-lithography and fused deposition modeling), new approaches for patient treatment were introduced in medicine in general, and in dentistry in particular. Rapid prototyping technology expanded the use of CT beyond diagnostics into surgical planning and the making of patient-specific tools and implants. It thus became possible to make anatomical models and patient-specific implants for different anatomic locations (such as skull parts, vertebrae, and hip joint replacement components) and patient-specific instruments (e.g., surgical guides) [3–6]. Attempts to produce custom orthopedic prostheses based on CT imaging data have been reported since 1985. The first documented case of an orthopedic device made using 3D digital technology was a mandibular subperiosteal implant made by James RA . At that time, direct metal printing was not available; therefore, CT data were used to create anatomical models of patients’ mandibles, which were then actualized as implants using traditional metal casting technology.

After direc metal laser sintering (DMLS) technology became available from EOS (Krailling, Germany) in 1995 , it became possible to make three-dimensional objects in metal with virtually any complexity. This opened up possibilities for completely digital manufacturing processes—a route from patient anatomy virtualization to digital design and direct printing in biologically compatible metal or alloy (such as steel, CoCr (cobalt-chromium) alloy, Ti64 alloy, or pure titanium). Introduced into the dental field, these techniques expanded the ways in which custom subperiosteal implants could be made. With currently available technologies (as of 2018), it is possible to make subperiosteal dental implants using any of the following four methods:Conventional: bone impression and lost wax casting metalTransitional: CT, 3D jaw model printing, lost wax casting in metalDigital: CT, modeling on virtual jaw model, printing in metal using DMLS or similar technologyHybrid: bone impression, silicone impression or stone model optical scanning, modeling of implant on virtual jaw model, printing in metal using DMLS or similar technology

Conventional: bone impression and lost wax casting metal

Transitional: CT, 3D jaw model printing, lost wax casting in metal

Digital: CT, modeling on virtual jaw model, printing in metal using DMLS or similar technology

Hybrid: bone impression, silicone impression or stone model optical scanning, modeling of implant on virtual jaw model, printing in metal using DMLS or similar technology

The first method is the known classic, long-established approach that requires a second surgery for implant placement. During the first surgery, an impression is taken with silicone material. Then, the implant is modeled on a refractory model, cast in metal, and finished between surgeries—usually 2–3 weeks. The implant is put into place in a second surgical procedure.

The second approach avoids the second surgery by using CT data obtained in advance and a refractory model for casting, duplicated from a 3D printed model. This method assumes that the user has access to CT and 3D freeform manufacturing in plastics, but has no access to metal printing technology. The drawback of this method is that more steps are involved than in the conventional method. Consequently, it may not be as precise (because of 3D printing and duplication steps).

The third method gives us the shortest path to the final product—custom-made implants— because no extra 3D printing or model duplication steps are involved. Most of the manufacturing takes place in the digital environment. CT data are used to make a virtual model, and the modeled implant is directly printed in the material of choice.

The fourth method appears to be unnecessary and redundant, but it has a place in practice, because the implants manufactured by the digital method do not always fit sufficiently well to be useful in practice. Once a surgeon encounters a poorly fitted implant made by the third method, he/she must follow Method 4—take an impression and postpone implant placement until a suitable implant has been made by the “hybrid” method. The use of this method might be necessary when a surgeon observes large discrepancies between the implant and bone.

This article will describe a digital approach for manufacturing of subperiosteal dental implants, conducted with the following.

Objectives

Define a digital workflow from CT scan to printed implantElucidate variables affecting the quality of the end product—i.e., the implantDetermine the possibility of completing this task using freely available software

Define a digital workflow from CT scan to printed implant

Elucidate variables affecting the quality of the end product—i.e., the implant

Determine the possibility of completing this task using freely available software


