
Abstract

Background

Our long-term goal is to design and manufacture a customized graft with porous scaffold structure for repairing large mandibular defects using topological optimization and 3D printing technology. The purpose of this study is to characterize the mechanical behavior of 3D printed anisotropic scaffolds as bone analogs by fused deposition modeling (FDM).

Methods

Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) images were used to reconstruct a 3D mandible and finite element models. A virtual sectioned-block of the mandible was used as the control group and the trabecular portion of the block was modified by topological optimization methods as experimental groups. FDM (FDM) printed samples at 0, 45 and 90 degrees with Poly-lactic acid (PLA) material under a three-point bending test. Finite element analysis was also used to validate the data obtained from the physical model tests.

Results

The ultimate load, yield load, failure deflection, yield deflection, stress, strain distribution, and porosity of scaffold structures were compared. The results show that the topological optimized graft had the best mechanical properties.

Conclusions

The results from mechanical tests on physical models and numerical simulations from this study show a great potential for topological optimization and 3D printing technology to be served in design and rapidly manufacturing of artificial porous grafts.





Discussion

PLA has not been currently used as bone analogs for mandibular reconstruction surgery in load-bearing areas. Its excellent biocompatibility and biodegradation properties are important reason for extensively studied in the literature as a scaffolding material for tissue engineering in craniofacial areas. Further strategies to improve its mechanical properties based on PLA modifications and PLA nanocomposite designs may be the key to improve its mechanical properties for mandibular reconstruction. This project is to provide valid information for readers to understand mechanical issues of 3D printed biomaterials.

Comparison of 3D printed beams with different printing angles

The load-deflection curves of Fig. 10 from three-point bending test validate that the direction of printing angle has a substantial effect on the mechanical properties of 3D printed parts. From the load-deflection curves of beam printed at 0-degree angle, the beam showed its elastic property in the initial loading stage. With the load increased, the beam entered the plastic stage, and plastic strain developed and cracked until global damage. The similar trend was observed from the load-deflection curves of beam printed at 45-degree angle. However, the load-deflection curve for beam specimen printed at 90-degree angle doesn’t show apparent yield or horizontal segment. After reaching the peak point, the crack propagates suddenly penetrated through the whole cross-section and the beam fractured into two parts. This is different from the flexural curves for the specimens printed at 0-degree or 45-degree angles, which show slight plastic failure before their rupture occurred.

Figure 11 shows the beam specimens with 0-degree printing angle presents flexural failure and the main cracks appeared in the mid-span and prorogated along the middle axis. The same failure mode can be seen in the beam specimens printed at 45-degree angle with cracks grew along 45-degree printing direction. For the beam specimens printed at 90-degree angle, it presents shear failure with the shear force exceeded the bond strength between the layers. The local failure and global failure occurred at a similar load. The beam was sheared off in the middle of the beam where the highest stress was concentrated.

The data from the three-point bending test of PLA (Table 1) also illustrate that all of the properties exhibit anisotropic behavior with property differences up to 60%. The average ultimate strength of a specimen printed at 0-degree was 54% higher than that of a specimen printed at 90-degree and 34% higher than that of those specimens printed at 45-degree. Similar patterns occurred on the failure stress and yield strength among those three groups. Furthermore, the average strain at failure was almost 2.5 times for the specimen printed at 0-degree than that printed at 90-degree and was also 14% higher than that printed at 45-degree. There was a great effect of printing direction on flexural modulus shown in Table 1. Flexural modulus values of specimens printed at 0-degree were 23% higher than that printed at 90-degree and 41% higher than specimens printed at 45-degree. Overall, beam specimens printed at 0-degree clearly performed the best among the three groups.

Comparison of 3D printed grafts with different printing angles

The load-deflection curves from three-point bending test (Fig. 12) illustrate anisotropic behavior of printed grafts. Similar mechanical behavior trends are observed, i.e., elastic and plastic deformation, of grafts based on printing directions. The data of flexural properties for grafts (Fig. 13) show that the maximum load of each graft printed at 0-degree is much higher than that of 90-degree printed with differences up to 72%. The average failure deflection of grafts printed at 0-degree was much higher than that of 90-degree printed with differences up to 73%. The yield load and deflection are not significantly affected by printing angle. By combining the experimental data and failure mode of grafts, it is found that for grafts printed at 0-degree, local failure started from upper filament layers, the propagation of cracks was perpendicular to the direction of loading. As the deflection increased, the tensile force between the bottom filament layers exceeded the bond strength; the crack opening began to grow along the printing direction until the global failure occurred. On the contrast, for grafts printed at 90-degree, local failure began from the upper filament and then propagated along the loading direction, the global failure occurred at almost the same time since the bonding between the adjacent filaments was weak, and the cracks could easily penetrate through the whole filament layers. It explains why the direction of main crack propagation in Fig. 14 are different from grafts printed with 00 and 900. Also, it matches with the obtained results that the maximum load and deflection for grafts printed with 00 are much higher than that of grafts printed with 900.

Comparison of the topological optimized graft with other designed grafts

The results of the finite element analysis of mechanical behaviors of the printed grafts are presented in Table 2. The maximum principal strain (%), Von Mises stress (MPa), and displacement (mm) of the topological optimized grafts decreases 73%, 65%, and 74% respectively when compared to those with round-pore structure design. Comparing to the square-pore structure, the optimized structure has a decrease of 51% in maximum principal strain, 31% in maximum stress, and 55% in displacement. The maximum Von Mises stress distribution of grafts (Fig. 15) indicates that the stresses are always concentrated at the top aspect of the graft. The same pattern is observed with maximum displacement. The topological optimized graft has significantly better results as most of the meshes keep very small stress and the maximum stress is well below the allowable stress (σ = 90 MPa). In order to compare the mechanical behavior of designed grafts with human natural mandible, the model of original structure of the mandible was built with the material parameters obtained from the CBCT files described in 2.2 under using Abaqus. The maximum principal strain, maximum Von Mises stress, and maximum displacement of original mandible model are 0.232%, 15.427 MPa, and 0.090 mm respectively. The topological optimized graft has the mechanical properties close to the real bone in terms of the maximum Von Mises stress and maximum displacement. The maximum principal strain of the optimized graft is slightly higher than that of the human mandible, which may be led by the difference of Young’s modulus and density between the bone and PLA material. The average Young’s modulus and density of bone in this patient are 10GPa and 1500 kg/m3, which is much higher than that of the PLA materials with 2GPa and 1200 kg/m3. However, the mechanical properties of the other two designed grafts are relatively poor, which cannot provide a good environment for defect repair in clinic.

The real porosity (%) of the topological optimized graft is 65, which increases 15% when compared to the grafts with square-pore structure. Although the porosity of topological optimized graft is lower than graft with round-pore scaffold structure, the strength and stiffness are significantly improved. The results verify that the topological optimization method is capable of optimizing the grafts by assigning more strut elements to the stress concentration area and removing strut elements from the low-stress area. In this way, graft can have higher space utilization, higher strength and stability, and more uniform stress distribution. However, these two conventional grafts use uniform configuration of strut elements, which can cause stress concentration and material waste. Overall, the printed graft designed by topological optimization method provides high strength, stiffness, and porosity that can provide a conducive environment from mechanical and biological perspectives.
