
Abstract

Upadacitinib is a selective Janus Kinase 1 inhibitor which is being developed for the treatment of several inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis. Upadacitinib was evaluated in Phase 3 studies as an oral extended-release (ER) formulation administered once daily. The purpose of this study was to develop a level A in vitro–in vivo correlation (IVIVC) for upadacitinib ER formulation. The pharmacokinetics of four upadacitinib extended-release formulations with different in vitro release characteristics and an immediate-release capsule formulation of upadacitinib were evaluated in 20 healthy subjects in a single-dose, randomized, crossover study. In vivo pharmacokinetic data and in vitro dissolution data (USP Dissolution Apparatus 1; pH 6.8; 100 rpm) were used to establish a level A IVIVC. Three formulations were used to establish the IVIVC, and the fourth formulation was used for external validation. A non-linear IVIVC best described the relationship between upadacitinib in vitro dissolution and in vivo absorption profiles. The absolute percent prediction errors (%PE) for upadacitinib Cmax and AUC were less than 10% for all three formulations used to establish the IVIVC, as well as for the %PE for the external validation formulation and the overall mean internal validation. Model was cross-validated using the leave-one-out approach; all evaluated cross-validation runs met the regulatory acceptance criteria. A level A IVIVC was successfully developed and validated for upadacitinib ER formulation, which meets the FDA and EMA regulatory validation criteria and can be used as surrogate for in vivo bioequivalence.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0378-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.





Discussion

A predictive level A non-linear IVIVC was established for upadacitinib ER formulation using in vivo and in vitro data for formulations containing a range of the release-controlling polymer (HPMC) of 10 to 35%. This range encompasses the target to be marketed formulation (formulation C) which contains 20% HPMC. The established IVIVC meets both the internal and external predictability per the FDA and EMA criteria and can potentially be used as surrogate for in vivo study if there is a need for formulation change (within the design space of the IVIVC) or manufacturing process change. Additionally, the established IVIVC enables setting the release specifications based on clinical relevance using the predicted range of upadacitinib exposures for formulations that fall within the proposed specifications. These analyses highlight the importance of evaluating non-linear models when linear IVIVC relationships cannot be established.

Non-linear IVIVC models, although less common than linear models, are considered acceptable as long as internal and/or external validation demonstrates adequate predictability of the IVIVC and that the same non-linear time scale is used for all formulations [17–19]. Evaluation of linear models for upadacitinib ER formulation consistently resulted in under-prediction of upadacitinib Cmax, (data not shown) suggesting slower dissolution in vitro than in vivo dissolution that was not adequately accounted for using a linear time scaling factor. This was also the case for various other in vitro test conditions evaluated to mimic the in vivo conditions (Supplemental Table 1). In general, potential causes for non-linearity in IVIVC can be expected to be the lack of uniformity in absorption of a drug throughout the gastrointestinal tract, possible saturation of transporters or first-pass metabolic pathways, or the nature of the formulation .

Upadacitinib is a highly soluble and highly permeable drug that exhibits linear pharmacokinetic characteristics over the range of doses that have been studied (up to a dose of 45 mg using the extended-release formulation and up to 48 mg using the immediate-release formulation). Given the high permeability and high solubility of upadacitinib, intestinal transporters are not expected to have clinically relevant role in upadacitinib disposition in vivo and no data suggest lack of uniformity in absorption throughout the gastrointestinal tract in humans. Therefore, it is likely that the nature of the formulation and how it releases the drug in vivo is driving the non-linear relationship between Tvitro and Tvivo. Analysis of deconvolved in vivo absorption profiles (Fig. 4) demonstrated a common two-stage profile for all four tested formulations: rapid early absorption over the first 4 to 5 h, followed by slower absorption afterward. Drug release from gel-forming hydrophilic matrices (such as that used in this upadacitinib controlled release formulation) has been known to come from two mechanisms: diffusion of drug molecules across the gel layer formed on the surface of the tablet and erosion of the polymer on the tablet surface (or the outer layer of the gel). The dissolution conditions tested in vitro (including those that used two different pHs or RPMs in the same test; Supplemental Table 1) were unable to mimic the time course of the release in vivo for all formulations; thus, establishing a linear IVIVC relationship was not feasible. Only a non-linear IVIVC with prediction errors meeting the acceptance criteria could be achieved no matter what dissolution condition was used. An important consideration for the development and validation of this non-linear correlation is that the model fitted to correct for the time scale difference between the in vitro data and the in vivo data is the same for all the formulations tested and is independent of the formulation or its release rate.

It is worth noting that the relationship between Tvitro and Tvivo appeared linear up to approximately 8 h in vivo. An approach that is alternative to the use of non-linear model would be to establish a linear IVIVC with in vivo cutoff time (tcutoff). However, use of tcutoff implies ignoring collected in vivo and in vitro data after the selected tcutoff. Additionally, Phoenix software that does not allow estimating the optimal tcutoff value and tcutoff will need to be selected as an arbitrary value based on observed data. Both of the aforementioned points can potentially introduce bias in the analysis when tcutoff is used. We opted to use a non-linear IVIVC approach rather than use of linear IVIVC with tcutoff to be able to use the totality of the data thus to avoid ignoring any in vitro or in vivo data and to allow the software to estimate the best-fitting parameters for the non-linear relationship based on the data.

The IVIVC model was developed while a Phase 3 study which evaluated the safety and efficacy of upadacitinib doses of 15 mg and 30 mg QD using the ER formulation was ongoing. The upadacitinib ER formulation is considered proportionally similar between the 15 and 30 mg strengths, and upadacitinib plasma exposures are linear over a wide range of IR and ER doses . Therefore, the IVIVC, developed using the highest clinically relevant strength at the time of conducting the analysis (30 mg strength), is considered applicable to the 15 mg strength.

The robustness of the model was evaluated through cross-validation using the leave-one-out approach; all cross-validation runs meet the acceptance criteria (%PE for each formulation < 15%; average internal validation %PE < 10%; external validation %PE < 10%). This assessment, although not a requirement per regulatory guidance documents, demonstrate robustness of the IVIVC and that it is not sensitive to data from a specific formulation. With a validated IVIVC, an in vitro test can potentially serve as a surrogate for bioavailability testing as well as a tool to screen formulations and set the dissolution and drug-release acceptance criteria.
