
Abstract

β-Galactosidase is widely used for hydrolysis of whey lactose. However, galactose inhibition has acted as a major constraint on the catalytic process. Thus, it is sensible to improve upon this defect in β-galactosidase through protein modification. To reduce the galactose inhibition of Aspergillus candidus β-galactosidase (LACB), four amino acid positions were selected for mutation based on their molecular bindings with galactose. Four mutant libraries (Tyr96, Asn140, Glu142, and Tyr364) of the LACB were constructed using site-directed mutagenesis. Among all of the mutants, Y364F was superior to the wild-type enzyme. The Y364F mutant has a galactose inhibition constant (Ki) of 282 mM, 15.7-fold greater than that of the wild-type enzyme (Ki = 18 mM). When 18 mg/ml galactose was added, the activity of the wild-type enzyme fell to 57% of its initial activity, whereas Y364F activity was maintained at over 90% of its initial activity. The wild-type enzyme hydrolyzed 78% of the initial lactose (240 mg/ml) after 48 h, while the Y364F mutant had a hydrolysis rate greater than 90%. The β-galactosidase Y364F mutant with reduced galactose inhibition may have greater potential applications in whey treatment compared to wild-type LACB.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-018-1418-5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Approximately, 85% of the milk used for manufacturing cheese is discarded as whey (Panesar and Kennedy 2012). Recovery of whole whey solids as ingredients for human or animal food has been a common approach adopted by large industrial processors. Since the main component (70–72%) of whey powder is lactose, direct utilization of whey is impeded by its poor sweetening power, low solubility, and lactose intolerance. Hydrolysis of lactose to monosaccharides, however, significantly increases the options to producing various by-products from whey. For example, hydrolyzed lactose has greater sweetening power and capability to replace saccharose or starch syrup in confectionery and ice-cream industries (Panesar et al. 2006). Hydrolyzed lactose can act as a substrate to produce d-tagatose, an important hexoketose monosaccharide sweetener with health-care functions (Oh 2007), which can greatly increase the additional output of whey in dairy processes.

β-Galactosidase (E.C. 3.2.1.23), also known as lactase, has been suggested for hydrolyzed-lactose milk production and whey hydrolysis (Panesar et al. 2006). However, complete hydrolysis at high lactose concentrations is difficult due to inhibition by galactose and glucose, which can slow the hydrolysis process or even stop the reaction (Park et al. 2010b). Galactose acts as a competitive inhibitor of microbial β-galactosidases by forming galactosyl–enzyme intermediates with β-galactosidase, preventing lactose from entering the active site (Gosling et al. 2010).

The mutation of β-galactosidase from Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus can clearly reduce galactose inhibition in lactose hydrolysis (Kim et al. 2011). However, β-galactosidase derived from Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus must pass a series of assessment before it can be applied to industrial food practices. The β-galactosidases of commercial interest are isolated mainly from Kluyveromyces spp., Candida kefyr yeast and the Aspergillus spp. fungi (Holsinger and Kligerman 1991; Grosová et al. 2008). Aspergillus candidus β-galactosidase (LACB, Uniprot entry: Q8TFE6) has excellent enzymatic properties, including high thermostability, high specific activity, and a wide pH range for enzymatic reactions compared to the commercial enzyme from Aspergillus oryzae ATCC 20,423 (Zhang et al. 2002). However, LACB is also seriously inhibited by galactose during whey lactose hydrolysis, and a large amount of galactose is produced during the process. For this reason, it is worth attempting to modify LACB for applications in the whey industry. The crystal structure of Aspergillus oryzae β-galactosidase (LACA, Uniprot entry: Q2UCU3) has been determined at a 2.60 Å resolution, and four galactose-binding sites were suggested to exist on the enzyme (Maksimainen et al. 2013). As LACB and LACA share high sequence similarity and both belong to the glycoside hydrolase 35 (GH-35) family, the latter was explored as a template to determine the galactose-binding residues in LACB. In this study, the predicted residues were engineered to reduce galactose inhibition.



Discussion

The structure of Aspergillus candidus β-galactosidase (LACB) was modeled using Aspergillus oryzae β-galactosidase (LACA) as a template. Galactose docking and molecular dynamics were examined using Discovery Studio 2.55. Based on the structure of LACA, one galactose molecule was sighted in the active area of LACB (Fig. 4), forming hydrogen bonds to Tyr96, Asn140, Glu142, and Tyr364 (Maksimainen et al. 2013). It can be inferred that these amino acid sites also have molecular interactions with the substrate lactose. When these amino acid sites mutate, their ability to bind galactose is reduced, so galactose inhibition is weakened, but their ability to bind to lactose substrate may also change. As a result, the specific activity of most mutants fell sharply, as shown in Fig. 1b, and they may not be suitable for lactose hydrolysis. As a special case, Tyr (Y364) is present at the end of the active site and has a hydrogen bond with it, whereas Phe (F364) lacks a hydroxyl group and does not form hydrogen bonds with galactose (Fig. 4), reducing the contact strength between galactose and the active site and causing galactose to be more readily released or galactose competitiveness to decrease. Because of the structural similarity between Phe (F364) and Tyr (Y364), there are no significant changes in the general conformation of LACB; therefore, enzyme activity was retained.

Fig. 4Superimposition between the structures of the wild-type enzyme and Y364F mutant. The red stick model indicates Y364 in the wild-type enzyme. Green indicates F364 in the Y364F mutant. Blue indicates galactose, and the red dash indicates the predicted hydrogen bond

Fig. 4

Superimposition between the structures of the wild-type enzyme and Y364F mutant. The red stick model indicates Y364 in the wild-type enzyme. Green indicates F364 in the Y364F mutant. Blue indicates galactose, and the red dash indicates the predicted hydrogen bond

As β-galactosidase plays a major role in converting lactose to glucose and galactose, selection for or by enzyme engineering to attain high-profile β-galactosidase is a popular topic in current enzyme studies. Mutation of galactose-binding sites could be an effective strategy for reducing galactose inhibition. In this study, there is only one difference in hydroxyl groups between the most effective mutant Y364F and wild-type LACB, but this difference has an obvious effect on the enzyme catalysis. An in-depth understanding of protein structure suggests that even slight changes in key amino acids may affect protein properties. This mutation strategy will greatly reduce the workload of screening mutants compared to directed evolution. For other studies, Dong et al. (Dong et al. 2013) identified the galactose-binding sites in thermostable β-galactosidase from Geobacillus stearothermophilus through homology modeling and molecular dynamics simulation and through mutating the predicted galactose-binding residues and obtaining a mutant, F341T, that can completely hydrolyze lactose. Kim et al. (Kim et al. 2011) modified ten predicted galactose-binding residues in lactase from Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus and finally obtained a mutant, F349S, with a Ki of 160 mM, which was 13-fold greater that of the wild-type enzyme. However, β-galactosidase derived from Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus must pass a series of assessments before it can be applied in industrial food practices. Commercial β-galactosidase enzymes are mainly derived from A. oryzae and Kluyveromyces lactis. A. oryzae β-galactosidase has a galactose inhibition constant (Ki) of 15, and K. lactis β-galactosidase has a Ki of 45, which is far lesser than that of the Y364F mutant in this study (Table 2). This result indicates that the Y364F mutant has better galactose resistance than commercial β-galactosidase.

In this paper, the mutant Y364F from Aspergillus candidus, a commercial species in the fungi genus Aspergillus, showed reduced galactose inhibition with a Ki of 282 mM. Y364F performed much better than the wild-type enzyme and commercial β-galactosidase, thus the mutant may have greater potential for lactose hydrolysis.
