
Abstract

CD3 bispecific antibody constructs recruit cytolytic T cells to kill tumor cells, offering a potent approach to treat cancer. T cell activation is driven by the formation of a trimolecular complex (trimer) between drugs, T cells, and tumor cells, mimicking an immune synapse. A translational quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP) model is proposed for CD3 bispecific molecules capable of predicting trimer concentration and linking it to tumor cell killing. The model was used to quantify the pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) relationship of a CD3 bispecific targeting P-cadherin (PF-06671008). It describes the disposition of PF-06671008 in the central compartment and tumor in mouse xenograft models, including binding to target and T cells in the tumor to form the trimer. The model incorporates T cell distribution to the tumor, proliferation, and contraction. PK/PD parameters were estimated for PF-06671008 and a tumor stasis concentration (TSC) was calculated as an estimate of minimum efficacious trimer concentration. TSC values ranged from 0.0092 to 0.064 pM across mouse tumor models. The model was translated to the clinic and used to predict the disposition of PF-06671008 in patients, including the impact of binding to soluble P-cadherin. The predicted terminal half-life of PF-06671008 in the clinic was approximately 1 day, and P-cadherin expression and number of T cells in the tumor were shown to be sensitive parameters impacting clinical efficacy. A translational QSP model is presented for CD3 bispecific molecules, which integrates in silico, in vitro and in vivo data in a mechanistic framework, to quantify and predict efficacy across species.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0332-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.





Discussion

Complex Exposure-Response Relationships for CD3 Bispecific Molecules

Bispecific antibodies are emerging as a leading class of biotherapeutic drugs in oncology, with the potential to enhance efficacy, increase tumor targeting and reduce systemic toxicity compared to their monospecific counterparts. These formats can vary in their molecular weight, PK, and ability to support immune effector functions. Perhaps more significantly, they can also vary in geometry a number of antigen binding sites, and the intrinsic affinity of individual arms. As a result of this complexity, dose-response relationships for bispecific antibodies can be non-intuitive and difficult to rationalize.

An additional complexity emerges for the CD3 bispecific T cell retargeting modality, where efficacy is driven by the formation of a trimer between the drug, T cell, and tumor cell. A bell-shaped concentration-response relationship can be observed (Fig. 1b), which is a well-described phenomenon for ternary complexes (30–33). When concentrations of antibodies are low, conditions favor the formation of trimers, with an optimal antibody concentration needed for trimer formation. However, as concentrations increase further, antibodies will be in excess and the equilibrium will shift to the formation of dimers between antibodies and T cell, or antibodies and tumor cell. This results in a decrease of response as dimers cannot trigger cytotoxicity. Since trimer concentration is a function of drug Kd values, tumor antigen expression, CD3 expression, and E:T ratio, a single drug concentration could potentially result in different trimer concentrations. Therefore, interpretation of response by drug exposure alone can be misleading. For the CD3 bispecific molecule discussed in this manuscript (PF-06671008), a bell-shaped dose-response relationship was not observed in mouse xenograft studies. This is probably because there was high P-cadherin expression on the tumor cell lines studied and good infiltration of T cells. In addition, PF-06671008 is a potent drug with low-Kd values for P-cadherin and CD3. As a result sufficient, trimer concentrations were achieved at each dose for efficacy. The bell-shaped relationship has been confirmed for other CD3 bispecific molecules in-house, where target expression is lower and/or affinity is weaker. It has also been observed in the literature from modeling of in vitro and in vivo experimental data.

Translational QSP Model for CD3 Bispecific Molecules

QSP models, which map out the causal path between drug administration and effect in a mechanistic framework, can be a useful tool to deconvolute complex mechanisms. Some examples of the use of mechanistic PK/PD models to quantify and understand the system dynamics of CD3 bispecific molecules are emerging in the literature. For example, Jiang et al. proposed a cell-killing model based on target cell-biologic-effector cell complex formation and used it to describe and predict in vitro cytotoxicity data for multiple T cell redirecting bispecific antibodies under different experimental conditions. Campagne et al. developed a PK/PD model for a bispecific CD123/CD3 DART molecule in non-human primates. The model describes DART molecule binding to peripheral CD3 expressing cells and CD123+ cells, T cell trafficking, activation, and expansion, and resulting peripheral depletion of CD123 cells.

In this manuscript, a translational QSP model is proposed for CD3 bispecific T cell retargeting molecules, capable of predicting trimer formation and linking it to tumor cell killing in in vivo efficacy models. In addition, the mechanistic nature of the model enables the integration of patient data/parameters and subsequent clinical predictions. The model consists of 3 parts describing the central, tumor, and effect compartments (Fig. 1a). The first part includes the bispecific antibody PK, binding to circulating T cells, and binding to the soluble target (when applicable) in the central compartment. The second part describes the distribution of the antibodies to the tumor compartment using mechanistic tumor penetration equations, and parameters calculated based on the drug’s molecular weight and tumor size. If the model is being used for a liquid tumor, these drug exchange tumor penetration parameters can simply be removed, as liquid tumors are assumed to provide less of a diffusion barrier than solid tumors, and equilibrium can be assumed between drug concentration in the central compartment and tumor interstitium. In the tumor compartment, the model incorporates binding of the drug to CD3 on T cells and the specific antigen on tumor cells to form inactive dimers and ultimately the active trimers. In the mouse model, a simple description of T cell expansion and contraction is included, constructed using mouse TIL data and published information. For translation of this model to human, data on T cell kinetics was not available and instead a baseline concentration of T cells was assumed with no proliferation.

In the third part of the model, the trimer concentration is used as the basis for quantifying tumor volume reduction using a tumor growth inhibition model. The model used is a transduction model describing tumor cell growth and tumor cell killing (as a function of the tumor trimer concentration). The model parameters from each mouse study can be used to calculate a secondary parameter called the TSC. This is the concentration of trimer where the tumor is neither growing nor regressing and can be considered as the minimum concentration of tumor trimer required for efficacy. The TSC is a useful parameter which can be used as a pharmacodynamic index to rank compounds, or to understand the difference in compound potency across mouse xenograft models, or as the denominator in therapeutic index calculations.

Application of the QSP Model to Quantify PK/PD Relationship for PF-06671008 in Mouse Xenograft Models

The model was used to quantify the preclinical PK/PD relationship of a CD3 bispecific molecule targeting P-cadherin (PF-06671008). To implement the model, the first step was to collect drug and system parameters describing the mechanism of action in the mouse. To calculate trimer concentration in the tumor, receptor expression of P-cadherin was determined for the HCT-116 and SUM-149 human tumor cell lines used in the mouse xenograft experiments. P-cadherin receptor expression in both cell lines (28,706 for HCT-116 and 17,500 for SUM-149) was lower than the expression of CD3 on T cells (100,000). This is typical for CD3 bispecific molecules as an expression of most tumor targets is less than 100,000 and as a result, tumor antigen receptor expression can be limiting and a key driver of efficacy. This was exemplified for a carcinoembryonic antigen T cell bispecific (CEA-TCB) for the treatment of solid tumors. CEA-TCB activity was found to be strongly correlated with CEA expression, with a higher potency observed in highly CEA-expressing tumor cells, with a threshold of 10,000 CEA-binding sites/cell. Target affinity data was also required to calculate trimer concentration. PF-06671008 binds to P-cadherin with a Kd of 0.47 nM and CD3 with a Kd of 11.4 nM. Binding to the tumor target antigen is often more potent than binding to CD3 on T cells in order to target the CD3 bispecific toward the tumor and away from peripheral tissues. In addition, strong binding to CD3 has been shown to drive more rapid clearance of an anti-CD3/anti-CLL1 bispecific in preclinical in vivo models.

The QSP model was used to integrate the mouse PK for PF-06671008 with the TGI data and to calculate TSCs in T cell engrafted (HCT-116) and T cell adoptive transfer (HCT-116 and SUM-149) established mouse tumor models. TSC values were very similar in the adoptive transfer model for both the SUM-149 and HCT-116 tumor cell lines (0.0092 and 0.011 pM respectively, with overlapping 80% confidence intervals). In contrast, a sixfold higher TSC value was obtained in the T cell engrafted versus T cell adoptive transfer model with the same cell line (HCT116, 0.064pM), and the respective 80% confidence intervals do not overlap. This is probably due to differences in T cell engraftment between the two mouse tumor models. In the T cell engrafted model, the T cells are administered as freshly isolated human PBMCs, 7 days prior to drug administration. In contrast, in the adoptive transfer model, activated T cells are given 1 day post-drug treatment. There are also other factors which can result in different TSCs including initial tumor size and differences in tumor growth rates.

Translation of the Model to the Clinic

The first step in translation to human was the prediction of the clinical PK parameters. For PF-06671008, circulating soluble target can act as a sink for the drug and reduce free drug exposure by forming complexes with PF-06671008. The reduction of free sPcad concentrations in cynomolgus monkey following dosing of PF-06671008 has been reported previously. The human PK of PF-06671008 was predicted from cynomolgus monkey PK using a two-compartmental PK model which incorporates binding to sPcad. Levels of sPcad were measured in healthy volunteers and in breast, colon, and lung cancer patients and the median concentration in cancer patients was used in the human model.

The next step in the clinical translation process was the incorporation of human systems parameters into the QSP model. These parameters are summarized in Table III and include T cell concentration in the circulation and tumors, tumor cell concentration, and typical tumor volumes in cancer patients. Values for all of these parameters were obtained from the literature. CD3 receptor expression was kept the same as the mouse model (which used human T cells or PBMCs). P-cadherin expression of 28,706 was used in the clinical simulations. This was the value from the HCT-116 cell line and represents a medium-high level expression of P-cadherin measured across human tumor cell lines used in in vitro cytotoxicity experiments (874–37,582).

The model simulated serum PK and tumor trimer concentrations following IV infusion of PF-06671008 at 0.01, 0.1, and 1 μg/kg QW to cancer patients are shown in Fig. 4 a and b, respectively. In human, the terminal half-life of PF-06671008 was predicted to be approximately 1 day. The concentration of trimer in the tumor, which is the more relevant concentration for efficacy, accumulates slowly (Cmax approx. 2 days post first dose) and persists for longer (Fig. 4b). This is due to slow diffusion of the drug into the tumor and formation of a more stable trimer which is retained within the TME. Since receptor expression of tumor target was known to be a key parameter, a sensitivity analysis was completed using the human model with P-cadherin expression varying from 1000 to 28,706 receptors/cell. This analysis confirmed that P-cadherin receptor expression was a sensitive parameter and that concentration of trimer formed in the tumor correlates with expression level (Fig. 5a). This has an impact on predicted clinical efficacy with a higher dose required for efficacy in patients with lower P-cadherin expression. In addition, the T cell number in the tumor was found to be a sensitive parameter (Fig. 5b), with a higher predicted concentration of trimer in the tumor with increasing E:T ratio. High doses of PF-06671008 were also simulated, to check to see where the bell-shaped relationship might be observed. At doses of > 1.8 mg/kg, a reduction in tumor trimer concentration is predicted with increasing dose levels (Supplementary Fig. 4). However, at these doses, the predicted trimer concentrations in the tumor are high enough that good responses would be expected (assuming the doses would be tolerated). A translational flow diagram describing the steps taken to translate CD3 bispecific drugs from preclinical TGI data in the mouse to human is shown in Fig. 6.Fig. 6QSP model-based strategy for translating preclinical data for CD3 bispecific compounds to the clinic. “Biomeasures” can be defined as system-dependent parameters. TAA is a tumor-associated antigen

Fig. 6

QSP model-based strategy for translating preclinical data for CD3 bispecific compounds to the clinic. “Biomeasures” can be defined as system-dependent parameters. TAA is a tumor-associated antigen

The translational QSP model described for CD3 bispecific compounds can be used to drive decision-making at different stages of the drug discovery and development continuum. At early stages, the model can be used to provide guidance on the compound selection, by predicting optimal Kd values for CD3 and the tumor antigen. This can be achieved by modeling of in vitro data, using a reduced version of the model without the PK (central and peripheral) compartments. For example, the model was previously used to describe the in vitro exposure-response of PF-06671008 in cytotoxicity assays and was able to simultaneously describe the kinetics of tumor and T cells at various E:T ratios. Once a lead compound has been selected, the model can be used to predict clinical doses and regimens and to optimize efficient clinical study design. A precision medicine approach could be adopted, whereby parameters in the model such as immune cell numbers, or tumor target expression levels, are tailored to individual characteristics of patients. This could result in a recommendation of different doses for different patients. The model has also been used to predict clinical starting dose for PF-06671008 using a minimal biological effect level approach (MABEL), which is recommended for CD3 bispecific constructs due to their immune agonistic activity following target engagement. A recent analysis by the FDA concluded that receptor occupancy-based methods were not advised for CD3 bispecifics. The QSP modeling approach is more suitable to determine MABEL as efficacy is driven by drug bound to both T cells and tumor cell, rather receptor occupancy of either target singly. It is also independent of E:T ratio or other experimental specificities.

The model in its current state is very useful for a range of tasks from optimization of drug design to clinical dose predictions. However, opportunities exist to improve the model. For example, the current model includes an empirical description of T cell activation/proliferation in mouse, constructed based on TIL analysis across dose and time. A more mechanistic model could be developed by collection and characterization of more tumor lymphocyte kinetic data across species. In addition, the model is based upon a “well-mixed” hypothesis in which tumor target and T cells are assumed to be homogeneously distributed throughout the tumor environment with equal opportunity for trimer formation. However, tumors are known to be a complex environment with a heterogeneous distribution of T cells and tumor cells expressing target. Future versions of the model will take this into account.
