
Abstract

The two most popular models used in anatomical training for residents, clinicians, or surgeons are cadavers and sawbones. The former is extremely costly and difficult to attain due to cost, ethical implications, and availability, while the latter is said to not have the same tactile fidelity or mechanical properties as human bone. This study examined the potential use of 3D-printed phantoms to emulate cadaveric, human vertebrae, in hopes of acting as a future use over cadavers. In so doing, we developed 3D-printed MedPhantom®, with the intended use to offer similar tactile feel, mechanical characteristics, and visual appearance as human bone. In order to quantify tactility, a mechanical test was developed where a 5-mm diameter diamond-coated bur spinning at 75,000 RPM swept across the specimens while continuously recording the resultant forces (N) and moments (N-cm), The bur sweep motion is common in orthopedic surgery and neurosurgery. Since most 3D-prints do not offer internal, trabecular structure similar to bone, an algorithm was written to create a stochastic framework of internal mesh to mimic cancellous bone within an STL (stereolithography) file. The ranges of mesh parameters were chosen after several visits with the neurosurgeons participating in the project. In order to quantify structural combinations of wall thickness, gap sizes, and varying cylindrical radii within a print, 1000 RPM compression test with a 5-mm diamond-coated bur was performed with resultant forces (N). Two sample t-test shows statistical significance that samples are not equal to the vertebrae (p < 0.05). Results from the bur sweep test showed 15% Gypsum® powder mixed with 100% Clear® Formlabs resin and 10% Castable® resin mixed with 90% Clear® resin were nearest to human, cadaveric vertebrae, with the difference of force and moment in the x-direction at only 5 N and 7–9 N-cm, respectively. Structural compression results showed that a 2 mm cortical wall, 4 mm or 5 mm gap size between cylinders inside the structure, and 0.25 mm radius of internal cylinders were the best fit parameters to match human vertebrae.



Introduction

Overview

THIS study aimed to characterize material and structure for use in CERLAB’s 3D-printed MedPhantom Spine, with the overarching goal of developing an alternative model and obviate the need for human cadaveric vertebrae and sawbones, reducing cost, saving on time, and quantifying tactile fidelity for surgeons outside of the operating room or surgical rehearsal. Currently, there is no mechanical or quantitative method to determine tactile feel in regard to burring or instrumenting bone, which is a characteristic and scale used by surgeons and clinicians when working with bone or tissue. In order to test the tactile similarity of our 3D-printed model to bone, we opted to compare the models to human vertebrae. Two different mechanical tests were done for the two different parameters being observed: a custom bur sweep test for material combination testing and a compression test for structural dimension combinations, both of which are explained in detail within the Methods section (II).

One of the chief complaints by neurosurgeons and clinicians we spoke to throughout our partnership with AGH, was they felt current models are either too costly, difficult to attain due to cost, ethical implications (i.e. animal models), availability, or do not have the same tactile fidelity as human tissue and bone. It was imperative to obtain a model that has the same architectural morphology as bone with similar visual appearance but can also provide a suitable tactile and mechanical feedback similar to what human bone offers. However, that poses the problem of how one goes about quantifying or providing data to support an opinion that is tactile feel, an often-subjective parameter. (see Fig. 1).Fig. 1Section cut of 3DP vertebrae showing internal mesh trabecular structure while housed within a thick cortical wall, attempting to model real bone. Code was written to add a stochastic framework of a mesh within a thick wall while the model was printed with 100% Clear® resin off the Form 2® SLA Printer

Fig. 1

Section cut of 3DP vertebrae showing internal mesh trabecular structure while housed within a thick cortical wall, attempting to model real bone. Code was written to add a stochastic framework of a mesh within a thick wall while the model was printed with 100% Clear® resin off the Form 2® SLA Printer

Therefore, we developed a mechanical test to mimic what occurs in orthopedic and neurosurgery and subsequently recorded resultant forces and moments from the test. In short, a drilling bur was attached to a fixated cup and swept across various combinations of 3D-prints, as well as human cadaveric spine to compare it to (see Figs. 2 and 3). This sweeping motion of the bur at speed as high as 75,000 RPM is commonplace in orthopedic and neurosurgery, or any surgery involving bone and tissue . For example, in a disc replacement surgery, a drilling bur would be initially used to shave off the vertebrae sandwiching the intervertebral disc prior to taking out the damaged disc and ultimately replacing it with a spacer filled with bone graft . Apart from the human vertebrae attained from cadavers, 3D-printed material combinations were developed by experimenting with several light-sensitive photopolymer resins (Formlabs®) and powder mixture combinations (Gypsum powder and Kevlar fiber).Fig. 2Setup of six-degrees-of-freedom machine. Similar to the freebody diagram in Fig. 4, the specimen is clamped in a cup within the bottom motor while the bur is attached to the top motor, sweeping in an arc motion across the top of the specimen. The motors are controlled pneumatically through a pressure system within the building. The increased pressure allows for various complex motions within the six-degrees-of-freedom (3 modes of translation, 3 modes of rotation), all with the capability of moving in sync with each other. Load cells, with a sensitivity of 0.01 N and max load of 10 kN, are located near both the top and bottom motorsFig. 3(a) Close-up image of bur in its holder attached at top motor sweeping across the specimen (human vertebrae) that is clamped within a cup on the bottom motor. The bur spun at 75,000 RPM which only required a foot on the pedal to run it, similar to how most burs operate in surgery. (b) Close-up image of bur sweeping across Dental® resin printed cube

Fig. 2

Setup of six-degrees-of-freedom machine. Similar to the freebody diagram in Fig. 4, the specimen is clamped in a cup within the bottom motor while the bur is attached to the top motor, sweeping in an arc motion across the top of the specimen. The motors are controlled pneumatically through a pressure system within the building. The increased pressure allows for various complex motions within the six-degrees-of-freedom (3 modes of translation, 3 modes of rotation), all with the capability of moving in sync with each other. Load cells, with a sensitivity of 0.01 N and max load of 10 kN, are located near both the top and bottom motors

Fig. 3

(a) Close-up image of bur in its holder attached at top motor sweeping across the specimen (human vertebrae) that is clamped within a cup on the bottom motor. The bur spun at 75,000 RPM which only required a foot on the pedal to run it, similar to how most burs operate in surgery. (b) Close-up image of bur sweeping across Dental® resin printed cube

The second parameter tested was for internal structural combinations. Bone has three predominant layers arranged in a sandwich configuration: an outer hard cortical shell layer with a spongy, cancellous (trabecular) middle layer which houses osteoblasts and osteocytes and is also referred to as the bone marrow . Trabecular bone, which lies between the cortical layers is said to have a spongy, mesh structure . In order to model this structure, an algorithm was written on Python to add a random, stochastic framework of cylindrical lattices within the given print, in this case the 3DP specimens being tested. In short, this algorithm took an empty of shell of an existing STL file, then proceeded to add an outer shell and internal cylinders. Cylinders were allowed to overlap but only once otherwise this could lead to too large of a clump, which would not achieve the idea of a mesh. The three parameters the user could change were outer shell thickness which represented the cortical wall thickness, the radius of the cylinders and gap sizes present within the print which represented the trabecular, spongy bone. The 5-mm diamond-coated bur spinning at 1000 RPM going through axial compression then pierced completely through the printed specimens and human, cadaveric vertebrae. A full compression test through the entirety of the specimens allowed for a full mechanical characterization at each layer. A higher speed RPM during the bur-sweep test mimicked motion and speed during orthopedic surgery .

Although there are several types of 3D-printing methods, the ones used in this study was stereolithography (SLA) and fused deposition modeling (FDM). SLA uses a laser to cure a liquid photopolymer to solid from the bottom up which was done using Formlabs Form 2® printer . FDM uses an extrusion process that extrudes melted plastic layer by layer onto a build plate . All printed specimens were printed from the Form 2® SLA printer, while FDM prints were outsourced from Shapeways™. The FDM prints consisted of PLA (polyactic acid) unpolished, PLA polished, and nylon. Different gypsum powder and Kevlar pulp combinations mixed with Formlabs® resins were experimented with during the bur sweep testing (see section II for details). Gypsum powder is primarily used in agricultural and construction applications by hardening and setting the material to be used for casting and construction . Kevlar is most popularly known to aid in the creation of the famous Kevlar vests, but this was an aramid pulp filled with highly fibrillated chopped fibers that are known to offer high strength, modulus and toughness .

The mechanical properties of the resins used from the Form 2® printer can be found on the Formlabs® website . Although ultraviolet (UV) light curing at 405 nm is shown to improve mechanical characteristics at, we found that this also in turn makes the material more brittle, making the print fail easily under a high-load of drilling, which in our case is at 75,000 RPM using a diamond-coated bur tip . While the ultimate tensile strength increases, the elongation at failure percentage decreases when UV-curing for Clear® resin, going from 12% to 6.2%, meaning it takes less elongation before the print fails, such as cracking or breakage . Flexible® has elastomeric properties with an elongation at failure value at 60% pre-cure and 75–85% post-cure, and Tough® resin has an elongation failure of 42% pre-cure and 24% post-cure . The higher the elongation to failure percentage is, the higher chance the print has to matching mechanical characteristics of bone without catastrophic failure due to brittleness. From this, we wanted to find an optimal cure time to improve mechanical characteristics where it increases hardness of the material to match that of human bone, but does not increase the brittleness, thus susceptibility to fail whether from a fracture, crack, or breakage. Therefore, the specimens were all UV-cured for only 10 min, as opposed to the recommended 30-min UV-curing time from Formlabs®.

Ultimately, the goal of this paper was to develop a model that can be used as a replacement for cadavers, specifically the vertebrae in the human spine. In order to do so, we developed and characterized 3D-printed material and structure and subsequently compared results to human, cadaveric vertebrae in order to find the best possible fit in regard to likeness. Finding a suitable 3D-printed model could potentially obviate the need for cadaveric specimens, which would reduce cost but also provide quantitative tactile fidelity which is integral in surgical rehearsal outside of the operating room.

Previous work

Currently, surgeons and residents have limited options for rehearsal outside of the operating room. Available options include cadaveric specimens, animal models, or sawbones. Cadaveric specimens provide the most anatomic and tactile realism, but they are limited in availability and require costs as high as $2000–$4000 USD, as well as the cost of maintaining them upon the costly attainment . In addition, the acquisition of cadavers for training courses is made difficult due to regulatory hurdles and the need for specialized storage facilities . Ethical concerns often limit the ability for surgeons to practice on animal models, while sawbones is better for demonstrating anatomy without providing necessary tactile feedback or showing pathology that could translate to skills in the operating room. Sawbone models, solid rigid polyurethane foam, are commonly used to also test for ASTM standards, acting as one of the more popular models for human bone that is not a cadaver . However, there is little to no differences in internal structure or cortical shell thicknesses like the 3DP models offered in this study. Furthermore, Zech et al. 2006 showed large differences and variations when comparing sawbones to bovine and human bone .

Although Stratasys® currently offers a wide range of 3D-printed anatomical models, they have a stronger focus in the field of pathology-specific anatomy or tissue emulation . Their 3D-printed models are also used for vasculature due to the complex nature of humans’ vasculature systems, which require an intensive amount of preparation pre-operatively . While Stratasys® claims their prints offer similar mechanical compliance to human tissue, there remains the issue of cost. Stratasys’s cost of 3DP anatomical models have said to be extremely costly compared to our current SLA printing from the Form 2® printers, where the former’s PolyJet® SLA resin prints can range from $6 K- $20 K (depending on size, orientation, material, and not including ownership of printer) while the latter’s Formlabs® SLA resin prints costs as low as $3500 (including ownership of printer and resin).

After further extensive research, there was little to be found for 3D-printed trabecular or internal framework within a solid print, specifically with the aim to mimic human cancellous or trabecular bone. One of the most important aspects of achieving tactile similarity to human bone for 3D-prints is to make certain there is an internal meshing to mimic spongy, trabecular bone, which is a facet this study attempted to produce and subsequently investigate.



Discussion

It was hypothesized and expected that force and moment in the y-direction would yield a low signal-to-noise ratio as evidenced in the free-body-diagram. The type motion being investigated is a sweeping arc of the drilling bur which means one plane, in this case the transverse or the x-direction plane, will yield the more pronounced results with larger values for both force and moments as well as an improved signal-to-noise ratio since there is little to no movement in the y-direction if the sweep is going in only the x-direction.

The force and moment in the x-direction show very similar trends, where 15% gypsum + 100% Clear and 10% Castable and 90% Clear are closest to vertebrae for both the force and moment in the x-direction (see Figs. 9a and 11a). This is expected since force and moment will be expected to increase in the plane that the motion is being observed in. For both force and moment in the x-direction, 15% gypsum (black in Figs. 9 and 11) and 10% castable (light cyan in Figs. 9 and 11) are both closest to vertebrae (red in Figs. 9 and 11). The reason the non-uv (green in Figs. 9 and 11) and UV (blue in Figs. 9 and 11) specimens plateau whereas the others do not is because the positioning of these two particular specimens were slightly higher than the rest, which means the bur had more space on the specimen to sweep across, leading to a plateau as the bur simultaneously continues drilling and digging through the specimen. However, the peaks of each of the samples in the graphs is of utmost prevalence since it signifies maximum force or moment the specimen undergoes when a bur is being applied in an arc-like motion similar to surgeons’ practice. The slowly decreasing plateau of the vertebrae (red in Figs. 9, 10 and 11) is attributed to the imperfections readily apparent in human anatomy, where even after the intervertebral disc is shaved down to the endplates, there still exists bumps and unevenness of bone, leading to not just one peak, but potentially multiple peaks, whereas the 3D-printed specimens could be printed flat.

Interestingly, it seems that the non-UV cured print is far too high compared to the vertebrae by a magnitude of 11.9 N in Fx and 18.4 N-cm in Mx, along with several other combinations of materials such as 100% Dental, UV cured clear, 10% Flexible + 90% Clear, and 100% Tough (see Figs. 9a and 11a and Tables 2 and 4). The prints including Tough® were expected to be higher than vertebrae since the Tough® material is made for durable and stronger required materials such as jet engine components with a flexural modulus of 0.6 GPa . However, 10% flexible combination prints were unexpected since Flexible® material is said to have a higher elongation to failure value at 60%, thus the assumption the resistance to the bur drilling would be lower. Formlabs™ claims that UV-curing significantly improves mechanical characteristics, but in turn does decrease elongation at failure, making it more brittle which could explain why that non-UV is still above vertebrae and below the UV-cured print .

Furthermore, 30% gypsum was lowest out of the powder mixes at 20.9 N in Fx and 21.3 N-cm in Mx. This was unexpected since it was hypothesized that including more gypsum would in fact harden the material (see Tables 2 and 4). This could be due to the gypsum powder hitting a certain threshold before the mixing and bonding of the gypsum while clear photopolymer resin yields a larger breakdown of the material, making the material less tough. This does tie in with the other values since 5% gypsum is shown to be the highest, while 15% lies in the middle, showing a direct trend of increasing gypsum powder yielding lower resistance to bur sweeping motion. From this, it can be inferred that somewhere between 15 and 30% gypsum with 100% clear resin mixture yields the optimal threshold in terms of not being too brittle while showing high enough resistance to drilling.

It is a positive sign that both the lateral bending moment Mx and force in the x-direction Fx have nearly identical trends in terms of where the peaks of the printed combinations lie in respect to the vertebrae’s peak. Based on these results, it seems that both 15% gypsum with 100% Clear® and 10% Castable® mixed with 90% Clear® are the best and optimal mixtures when it comes to mimicking vertebral bone for this particular bur-sweeping motion. It can be furthermore argued that finding a gypsum mixture somewhere between 5 and 15%, perhaps 8–10% could yield an even more accurate overlapped spectra of material properties with that of bone since the 5% gypsum mixture’s values are above the vertebrae’s forces and moments while the 15% gypsum mixture is below.

Moreover, the FDM print comparisons shows that nylon is significantly higher than the vertebrae, for both Fx and Mx, lying in the same range values as the other higher mixtures such as 10% tough, 10% flexible, etc. Fx for nylon, PLA unpolished, PLA polished had maximum values at 50.4 N, 21 N, and 19.8 N, respectively while the Mx had maximum values at around 52.7 N-cm, 12.2 N-cm, and 29.7 N-cm, respectively (see Figs. 10 and 12 and Tables 2 and 4). This illustrates PLA polished and unpolished have little to no differences while PLA and nylon both are not good fits with that of human bone when it comes to the bur sweeping motion.

In regard to the drill compression results, although the results do not exactly match up with that of the vertebrae, the trends prove similar, as well as the magnitudes of the changing parameters not being far off. For cortical wall thickness, it can be argued that 2 mm thickness is the best candidate for a best fit due to holding the highest peak and largest amplitude compared to the vertebrae (see Fig. 13a). Gap size radius demonstrates that 4 mm and 5 mm are the best candidates due to their large amplitudes, where 4 mm gap size shows a slight increase in the trabecular region (middle of the peaks), meaning that the load cell is in fact sensing an increase in force but still lower than the peaks of the cortical walls (see Fig. 13b). Lastly, radius of internal cylinders show that 0.25 mm and 0.3 mm radii are closest to the vertebrae, both of which have the largest amplitudes at the cortical walls while 0.3 mm has the highest force in the middle between the two peaks, coming closest to the vertebrae, off by only 2–4 N (see Fig. 13c). Therefore, the best combination based on these results for cortical wall thickness, gap size, and radius of internal cylinders are 2 mm thickness, 3–4 mm gap size, and 0.25–0.3 mm radius of cylinders. However, there is work left to be done in terms of finding a better fit since there are several more values and parameters that can be changed and the peaks and amplitudes do not fully align with that of the human vertebrae’s force compression values.

Despite the promising results, there still remains work to be done to find the best material and internal structure combination. In terms of material, finding a gypsum combination between 5 and 15% mixed with clear resin or varying combinations of castable with perhaps gypsum need to be further investigated. Internal structure parameters need to be changed as well where the prints could be perhaps printed at higher resolution so cortical wall thickness from 2 to 2.5 mm thickness can be investigated, gap sizes of 3–4 mm, and radius of internal cylinders between 0.25–0.3 mm.

Further work will involve a qualitative study with participants including several residents, clinicians, and practicing neurosurgeons. They will be given the samples similar to this mechanical study and will rate them on a given scale from 1 to 5 for categories of similar feel to human bone using the bur, the cortical to cancellous transition using the bur, instrumentation using a kerrison to break off the print, and visual appearance. This should shed light on any internal consistency that will exist between the results in this study and the qualitative study in the future. The material’s bur sweep results can be argued to demonstrate that a method has been developed to quantify tactile fidelity as well as a drill compression test to validate similarities between trabecular and cortical shells of real, human bone to that of a 3D-printed specimen.

Limitations

Unfortunately, the bur sweep test is a complex motion being investigated, requiring an extremely responsive DAQ for the several values of moments and forces being measured and quantified simultaneously. This in turn could lead to lots of noise, as seen in the figures above. Smoothing was done in MATLAB to address this but could only aid in reducing noise to a certain extent. Using a more sensitive and lower load cell, as opposed to the 10 kN load cell could yield a higher sensitivity when investigating lower loads such as this. Furthermore, the bur sped at an extremely high rate (75,000 RPM). This rate was again chosen since it is roughly around the speed orthopedic and neurosurgeons use to drill through bone during surgery. However, when wanting to measure forces, moments, and other variables to high accuracy, adding a high-speed torque and movement has potential to increase the noise significantly, aiding to a blurrier picture of data.

The load cell principle also applies to the drill compression test where a 10 kN load cell can argued to be too high since the forces being investigated lie in the range of 0–30 N. Another limitation for the drill compression test is there are several more combinations and variations that could have been tested; we can observe the small forces that occur between the cortical shells, but ultimately, we want that to increase as much as possible while not surpassing the forces seen when the drill goes through the cortical wall (the two highest peaks in the graphs). There also comes the potential problem of stability, where since we are incorporating a rotating movement, it adds potential for more noise or less accurate results; it could have been possible the rotations could have yielded higher noise.

Another limitation is there was only one size and type of drill-bit used, since this is the predominant size and type used in most operating rooms (ORs) by surgeons attending AGH (5 mm diamond-coated bur tip). With this, only one speed RPM of 75,000 was investigated for the bur sweep since this is once more roughly the speed surgeons use in the OR. Future studies can investigate the impact of different drill bit sizes and RPM speeds when it comes to bur sweeping for 3DP and vertebrae. Furthermore, apart from experimenting with varying bur tips or RPM speeds, changes in the rate of the sweeping arc and its resultant forces and moments could also be investigated in the future. Since we only investigated 1.5 mm/s feed rate of the sweep, varying feed rates with both the bur sweep and the compression could potentially yield different results.

Moreover, prior to choosing the appropriate parameters for the internal structure of cylinders and the accompanying cortical wall thicknesses, surgeons and researchers had several meetings and discussions in order to map out the best fit combinations. There was no quantitative method involved in choosing the combinations, but simply qualitative feedback from surgeons that led to narrowing down of the internal structure parameters. The information that was important in these meetings was how close were the prints to real, human bone and how visually accurate were they? This included the cortical wall thickness, the appearance of the trabecular meshing, how the 3D-printed structures felt upon burring at 75,000 RPM and how well they could be instrumented such as using a kerrison or pliers to break off pieces. This is a limitation because it can be argued as subjectivity which led to these parameters, not necessarily a quantitative method to ascertain these combination sizes for the structure of the 3D-printed specimens.

Lastly, although the 3DP model we developed aimed to mimic a cortical to cancellous/trabecular bone structure, these models were only tested against human vertebrae. Although it can be argued vertebrae does in fact mimic bone due to the hard endplate surfaces and the anisotropic structure housed within, this certainly does not imply that the vertebrae’s bone will have the same exact hardness, resistance to the bur, or mechanical integrity as other bones in the body. It is possible that if the 3DP models were compared instead to bone in other areas of the body, the results may vary. Cadaveric human vertebrae were used because it was the most readily available, cheapest, and granted access via the hospital.
