
Abstract

Sporotrichum thermophile, a known producer of industrial enzymes exhibited stability in the presence of ionic liquids (ILs).The study reports, for the first time, the stress response of S. thermophile upon exposure to ILs. In vitro assay showed increased anti-oxidative enzyme levels indicating ROS-mediated oxidative stress by ILs. The proteomic profile and identification of differential proteins confirmed the fungal adaptations by (i) increased expression of glycolytic enzymes and ATP synthases (ii) downregulation of TCA cycle and protein synthesis machinery components (iii) expression of HSP70 and catalase/peroxidase. These changes are indicative of metabolic regulation of many important pathways and how ILs can be used to manipulate protein behavior.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-019-1771-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Ionic liquids (ILs) constitute a new class of solvents with a promising future in the field of green technology (Smiglak et al. 2014). These solvents, organic salts by nature, exhibit unique properties like negligible vapor pressure, high solvating ability and thermal stability. They simultaneously offer the advantage of being easily modifiable, which confers on them different properties based on the cation and anion modified. These have, hence, been termed as “designer solvents” (Dixit 2013).

The exploitation of ILs is majorly in the area of biomass processing for the generation of second-generation biofuels (Hou et al. 2017; Sheldon 2016). The lignocellulosic biomass is quite recalcitrant in nature due to the presence of cellulose component. Hence, it is pre-treated with ILs in the first step to loosen it or to make it accessible for enzyme-mediated saccharification in the subsequent step (Khare et al. 2015). Since ILs have shown to exert toxic effect towards saccharifying enzymes like cellulases and xylanases, the IL-pre-treated biomass has to be washed with water several times to remove the residual IL (Yu et al. 2016). In this context, the present approaches deal with the screening or engineering of enzymes which are stable in the presence of ILs so that the whole process can be carried out in a single pot (Xu et al. 2016). Due to the high cost of enzymes, biocatalysis using microbial cells has recently gained momentum, since it is cost effective and maintains a native domain for functioning of enzymes (de Carvalho 2017). On similar lines, if the microbial cells are stable towards the ILs effect, the enzymes produced by them will also be active under such conditions thereby enabling the development of an in situ pre-treatment and saccharification approach. The suitability of ILs for biocatalytic whole-cell applications is gaining momentum but the studies pertaining to it are quite limited due to toxic effects of ILs on many microorganisms (Shen et al. 2016). Generally the conventional types of ILs are quite damaging to the bacterial cells causing membrane perturbance and lysis (Bhattacharya et al. 2018). However, molecular level understanding on the interaction of ILs with bacteria, yeast or fungus is presently limited.

S. thermophile (syn. Myceliophthora thermophile) is known to produce a number of industrially relevant enzymes such as xylanases, cellulases, phytases, esterases and pectinases (Singh 2016). To further explore the usefulness of using S. thermophile cells for IL-mediated saccharification, their stability in ILs has been previously studied (Sadaf and Khare 2017). In this work, it was observed that S. thermophile was able to grow profusely and produce xylanase in the presence of two most commonly used ILs, [EMIM][OAc] and [BMIM][MeSO4], indicating high tolerance of the fungus towards these ILs. The IL stability of these adapted cultures further led to cell-based simultaneous pre-treatment and saccharification.

A mechanistic understanding of the effects of ILs on fungal cells can help to explain such stability and outline future possibilities of enhancing biotransformation yield. Considering this, Sporotrichum thermophile was selected to further study IL-induced stress responses upon exposure to a compatible IL, [EMIM][OAc] which did not majorly affect S. thermophile growth and xylanase production and a highly non-compatible IL, [BMIM][BF4], which drastically inhibited S. thermophile growth and xylanase production. Hence, the anti-oxidative enzyme levels and global proteomic changes in S. thermophile were studied under the influence of these two ILs. With few proteomic studies on fungal systems reported, the current work is relevant since proteomic analysis on IL interaction with an extremophilic fungus is being reported for the first time. An interpretation of the fungal behavior upon IL exposure will help in expanding the knowledge on IL induced stress as well as its adaptations. Results from this study will also help to reflect on how such unique solvents can be used in future to manipulate proteins of biotechnological relevance.


