
Abstract

Purpose

Microneedle patches are arrays of tiny needles that painlessly pierce the skin to deliver medication into the body. Biocompatible microneedles are usually fabricated via molding of a master structure. Microfabrication techniques used for fabricating these master structures are costly, time intensive, and require extensive expertise to control the structure’s geometry of the structure, despite evidence that microneedle geometry is a key design parameter. Here, a commercially available 3D printer is utilized, for the first time, to quickly and easily manufacture microneedle masters.

Design/methodology/approach

Because commercially available 3D printers are not typically used for micron-scale fabrication, the influence of three different sources of error- stair-stepping, aliasing, and light abberations- on the resulting structure is investigated. A custom Matlab code is written to control the light intensity projected off of each individual micromirror (through grayscale) at a given time. The effect of the layer height, the number of layers, and grayscale on the sharpness, surface texture, and dimensional fidelity of the final structure is described.

Findings

The Autodesk Ember is successfully utilized to fabricate sharp microneedles with a tip radius of approximately 15 μm in less than 30 min per patch (as compared to weeks to months for existing approaches). Utilization of grayscale improves surface texture and sharpness, and dimensional fidelity within ±5% of desired dimensions is achieved.

Originality/value

The described 3D printing technique enables investigators to accurately fabricate microneedles within minutes at low cost. Rapid, iterative optimization of microneedle geometry through 3D printing will accelerate microneedle research through improved understanding of the relationship between microneedle structure and function.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1186/s41205-019-0039-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Microneedles are arrays of sub-millimeter sized needles that painlessly pierce the outer layer of the skin to deliver medicine into the body [1–3]. Microneedles are particularly useful for the delivery of molecules that cannot be delivered orally, such as proteins, peptides, and molecules with poor solubility or permeability [1–3]. Because drug delivery using pain free microneedles is preferred by patients as compared to hypodermic needles, microneedle based delivery may be an attractive commercial product exhibiting improved patient compliance, particularly for indications requiring frequent injections, such as insulin or hormone therapies .

Fabrication of polymeric microneedles is usually accomplished through silicone molding of a master structure. Master structures are commonly fabricated using silicon based manufacturing techniques including wet etching, dry etching, or photolithography [6–8]. Microneedle size and shape dictate penetration ability, drug loading capacity and release rates,but extensive optimization is required to control geometry with existing approaches. Design constraints, such as limited available aspect ratios, are often introduced due to technical limitations of the fabrication technologies . Further, the costly equipment and complex processes required result in long lead times (on the order of months) and present a high barrier to entry into the microneedle field.

More recently, additive manufacturing (“3D Printing”) of microneedle arrays has been investigated. Additive manufacturing enables nearly unlimited control over microneedle design. Stereolithography, a conventional 3D printing approach that fabricates parts by shining light onto a photoreactive resin, has been used to fabricate microneedles, but with suboptimal fidelity to the desired structure . For example, Lu et al. demonstrate stereolithography of microneedles, but the needles appear to be visually blunt . Alternatively, Narayan and colleagues have utilized a high resolution 3D printing technique called two photon polymerization to fabricate microneedle arrays . While this approach produces ultrasharp microneedle arrays, fabrication times are long (on the order of days, due to the time required to raster the laser over the entire array) and access to costly and highly specialized equipment is required. Johnson et al. demonstrated rapid fabrication of sharp microneedle arrays using a new continuous 3D printing technique called Continuous Liquid Interface Production (CLIP) in less than two minutes per array , but the high resolution equipment that was used is not currently commercially available (though lower resolution systems are on the market). Therefore, the ability to 3D print microneedle masters quickly using commercially available equipment would be an improvement in the field.

In this report, we demonstrate additive manufacturing of microneedle arrays using the Autodesk® Ember™, a commercial desktop 3D printer which retailed for approximately $7500 USD at the time of experimentation. This stereolithographic 3D printer produces parts one layer at a time by photopolymerization (light induced polymerization) (Fig. 1). First, a computer aided design (CAD) file of the desired part is created and computationally sliced into cross-sections (layers) (Fig. 1a-b). A digital light projection (DLP) chip then projects an image of each layer into the resin bath. When the light image reaches the resin bath, photopolymerization cures the part in a layer by layer fashion (Fig. 1c).Fig. 1The stereolithography process. a) A CAD file of the desired part is created and b) computationally sliced into layers. c) Each layer is converted to an image that is d) projected into the resin bath as the layer is being fabricated. The image is generated by reflecting a light off of an array of micromirrors called a DLP chip and into the resin. Light induced polymerization produces the part

Fig. 1

The stereolithography process. a) A CAD file of the desired part is created and b) computationally sliced into layers. c) Each layer is converted to an image that is d) projected into the resin bath as the layer is being fabricated. The image is generated by reflecting a light off of an array of micromirrors called a DLP chip and into the resin. Light induced polymerization produces the part

Stereolithography based 3D printers are known to introduce three types of defects into parts (Fig. 2). “Stair-stepping” is introduced when a continuous part is sliced into layers in the z direction. The resulting stack of layers is an imperfect approximation of the original part with jagged surfaces (Fig. 2b). A second type of defect, “aliasing”, is produced when each layer is projected as an individual image. Each image is projected off of a DLP chip- an array of micromirrors which produces the image by reflecting light off of individual micromirrors in either the “ON” or the “OFF” position. Each individual micromirror makes up a single 50 × 50 μm pixel within the light image, where black pixels are micromirrors in the “OFF” position and white pixels are micromirrors in the “ON” position. Because the DLP chip contains a finite number of pixels, the projected image is an approximation of each layer in the part, with the resolution defined by the number of micromirrors in the array (Fig. 2c). Lastly, additional errors are introduced due to imperfect focus of the image and diffraction of light within the 3D printer. These aberrations introduce differences between the image sent to the projector and the light distribution that reaches the resin (Fig. 2d) .Fig. 2Sources of error and correction techniques in stereolithography based 3D printing Process. a The 3D printing process begins with a CAD file of the desired part. The part is then b) computationally sliced into layers which are an imperfect approximation of the original part. c) Each layer is then converted into an image that can be projected off of a DLP chip. Because the images are generated using a discrete array of pixels, the image is also an approximation (alias) of the desired object with jagged edges. d When the image reaches the build surface, diffraction and imperfect focus distort the image. These sources of error can be corrected by e) decreasing the thickness of each slice, f) improving image resolution by introducing grayscale (antialiasing) and g) modeling and correcting light distributions (often also employing grayscale). Note that the images in c) and f) show the microneedle being diagonally oriented relative to the DLP chip to exaggerate aliasing for visualization. In reality, images are oriented orthogonally to the DLP chip, as shown in Fig. 1, Additional file 5: Figure S5, Additional file 6: Figure S6 and Additional file 7: Figure S7

Fig. 2

Sources of error and correction techniques in stereolithography based 3D printing Process. a The 3D printing process begins with a CAD file of the desired part. The part is then b) computationally sliced into layers which are an imperfect approximation of the original part. c) Each layer is then converted into an image that can be projected off of a DLP chip. Because the images are generated using a discrete array of pixels, the image is also an approximation (alias) of the desired object with jagged edges. d When the image reaches the build surface, diffraction and imperfect focus distort the image. These sources of error can be corrected by e) decreasing the thickness of each slice, f) improving image resolution by introducing grayscale (antialiasing) and g) modeling and correcting light distributions (often also employing grayscale). Note that the images in c) and f) show the microneedle being diagonally oriented relative to the DLP chip to exaggerate aliasing for visualization. In reality, images are oriented orthogonally to the DLP chip, as shown in Fig. 1, Additional file 5: Figure S5, Additional file 6: Figure S6 and Additional file 7: Figure S7

Several techniques have been investigated to mitigate these defects. For example, “stair-stepping” can be mitigated by decreasing layer height . This approach improves the fidelity of the part to the desired CAD file, but increases fabrication time due to realignment between steps (Fig. 2e). In order to reduce “aliasing”, a technique called “anti-aliasing” is used . “Anti-aliasing” improves the resolution of each projected image by adding grayscale into the black and white images (Fig. 2f). Physically, this grayscale is manifested by rapidly dithering the micromirror on the DLP chip such that the mirror alternates between the “ON” (white) and “OFF” (black) positions at a high frequency. The percentage of time spent in the “ON” position determines the amount of light that is projected, which controls the volume of resin that polymerizes to form the part. Therefore, anti-aliasing (introducing grayscale) provides more levels of control over which resin cures to produce a smoother part. Lastly, a number of (slightly more complicated) techniques have been used to correct for errors caused by aberration of light. For example, several authors have modeled light intensity distributions created using DLP chips in order to optimize the light intensity projected off of each pixel to most closely match the desired CAD file (Fig. 2g) .

In this work, we investigate using the Autodesk® Ember™ to fabricate microneedle masters. We study the effect of each type of defect (“stair-stepping”, “aliasing” and light effects) on the resulting microneedle master structure. We find that with proper use of correction techniques the Autodesk® Ember™ is capable of producing sharp microneedle arrays in less than 30 min per patch. We anticipate that additive manufacturing of microneedle arrays will lower the barrier to entry into the microneedle field for researchers with no background in microfabrication. Further, the ability to easily adjust microneedle size and shape can reduce lead times for new microneedle designs, catalyzing the optimization of microneedle arrays in preclinical research. This ability to rapidly iterate microneedle geometry may enable improvements in maximum drug loading, reductions in the required force of application, or an increase in the strength of microneedles in an array .


