
Abstract

Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging with radiolabeled drugs holds great promise to assess the influence of membrane transporters on hepatobiliary clearance of drugs. To exploit the full potential of PET, quantitative pharmacokinetic models are required. In this study, we evaluated the suitability of different compartment models to describe the hepatic disposition of [11C]erlotinib as a small-molecule model drug which undergoes transporter-mediated hepatobiliary excretion. We analyzed two different, previously published data sets in healthy volunteers, in which a baseline [11C]erlotinib PET scan was followed by a second PET scan either after oral intake of unlabeled erlotinib (300 mg) or after intravenous infusion of the prototypical organic anion-transporting polypeptide inhibitor rifampicin (600 mg). We assessed a three-compartment (3C) and a four-compartment (4C) model, in which either a sampled arterial blood input function or a mathematically derived dual input function (DIF), which takes the contribution of the portal vein to the liver blood supply into account, was used. Both models provided acceptable fits of the observed PET data in the liver and extrahepatic bile duct and gall bladder. Changes in model outcome parameters between scans were consistent with the involvement of basolateral hepatocyte uptake and canalicular efflux transporters in the hepatobiliary clearance of [11C]erlotinib. Our results demonstrated that inclusion of a DIF did not lead to substantial improvements in model fits. The models developed in this work represent a step forward in applying PET as a tool to assess the impact of hepatic transporters on drug disposition and their involvement in drug-drug interactions.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0323-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

The liver is the major organ responsible for the metabolism and excretion of xenobiotics. It expresses several different transport proteins belonging to the solute carrier (SLC) and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) families in both the blood-facing basolateral membrane and in the bile-facing canalicular membrane of hepatocytes. These transporters regulate the uptake and biliary secretion of drugs and their metabolites into and out of the hepatocytes and therefore play a key role in the clearance of drugs. In addition to drug metabolizing enzymes, transporters can be involved in drug-drug interactions (DDIs). For instance, co-administration of a drug which is a substrate and a drug which is an inhibitor of the same transporter(s) can lead to changes in the pharmacokinetics (PK) of the substrate drug making transporters a potential source of PK variability.

The interaction of drugs with transporters and their potential to be involved in DDIs is commonly studied using in vitro assays in which, for instance, drug uptake in cell lines overexpressing particular transporters is compared to drug uptake in non-transporter overexpressing control cells. In cases in which in vitro data point to a risk for transporter-mediated DDIs, in vivo studies in healthy human volunteers may become necessary. Usually, transporter-mediated DDIs lead to changes in plasma PK and can be studied in vivo by monitoring plasma drug concentrations. However, in other cases, transporter inhibition can lead to pronounced changes in the drug tissue concentrations with a negligible effect on the plasma PK. In order to assess the influence of transporters on drug tissue distribution, a method to measure drug tissue concentration is needed. Yet, current approaches to determine drug concentration in tissues mostly involve invasive procedures, which are not applicable in humans.

Noninvasive nuclear imaging methods such as positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) allow radiolabeled drug molecules in the body to be visualized and monitored, therewith facilitating the study of time-dependent changes in drug tissue concentrations. Accordingly, these imaging methods can be implemented to assess the role of drug transporter function in drug disposition. In order to fully exploit the potential of these noninvasive imaging approaches in the study of drug transporters, quantitative PK modeling approaches are required. PK modeling of PET data can provide quantitative parameters such as the exchange rate constants of radiolabeled drugs between plasma and tissue compartments, which can be directly related to the function of ABC and SLC transporters localized at blood-tissue interfaces. Whereas considerable knowledge exists with respect to the modeling of PET data in the brain (8–12), less effort has so far been dedicated to the kinetic modeling of PET data in other organs, such as the liver. In the case of kinetic modeling of the liver, the dual blood supply to the organ (i.e., by the hepatic artery and the portal vein, PV) is an important factor to be considered.

Erlotinib is an epidermal growth factor receptor targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitor used to treat advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer and pancreatic cancer. It is mainly excreted via the hepatobiliary route and is a substrate of several ABC and SLC transporters including breast cancer resistance protein (ABCG2), P-glycoprotein (ABCB1), organic anion transporter 3 (SLC22A8), organic cation transporter 2 (SLC22A2), and organic anion-transporting polypeptide 2B1 (SLCO2B1) (16–18). Erlotinib shows large inter-individual differences in its PK, which may be related to variability in membrane transporter function in the liver. We have shown before that PET with [11C]erlotinib can be used to study hepatic disposition of erlotinib in humans. In order to assess the influence of hepatocyte transporters on hepatobiliary excretion of [11C]erlotinib, we have previously followed two different approaches. In a first study, we assessed the effect of pre-treatment with an oral therapeutic dose of unlabeled erlotinib on the hepatic disposition of [11C]erlotinib. In a second study, we assessed the influence of pre-treatment with the prototypical SLCO transporter inhibitor rifampicin on hepatic disposition of [11C]erlotinib.

In this study, we used these previously published human [11C]erlotinib PET data sets to evaluate the suitability of different compartment models to describe and quantify the kinetics of [11C]erlotinib in the liver and the bile duct/gall bladder. Two different compartment models were assessed (a three-compartment and a four-compartment model) that account for the kinetics of different hepatobiliary sub-structures. We also studied the differences in the PK modeling of [11C]erlotinib in the hepatobiliary system with traditional modeling using only a sampled arterial input function (AIF) and when a dual input function (DIF), which takes the 75% contribution of the PV into account, was used as the model input. The ultimate goal of the study was to contribute to finding a generic liver PK model that can be potentially applied to describe the hepatic disposition of other radiolabeled drugs in humans to facilitate future use of PET in the study of membrane transporter function in the liver.



DISCUSSION

To advance the applicability of PET imaging as an upcoming tool in the study of hepatic transporter function, we evaluated different compartment modeling approaches for the analysis of previously acquired human PET data with [11C]erlotinib, which we considered as a small-molecule drug model, which undergoes transporter-mediated hepatobiliary excretion.

Traditional PET PK models are based on physiologically based pharmacokinetic models, in which the compartments correspond to predefined organs or tissues interconnected by blood flow, lymph flow, or other biochemical fluxes. Typically, the input of the system in PET kinetic modeling is a directly measured arterial blood or plasma curve (radioactivity in the blood/plasma as a function of time) termed AIF. Even though the blood is a physical compartment, it is typically not a mathematical compartment in PET kinetic models since it is a directly measured curve rather than being solved for.

The liver receives blood from the hepatic artery (~ 25%) from which it acquires oxygenated blood, and from the PV (~ 75%) that provides deoxygenated blood containing newly absorbed nutrients, drugs, and, occasionally, toxins from the gastrointestinal tract. Thus, considering only AIF as a source of radioactivity to a liver PK model might not be accurate. Since direct blood sampling from the PV is not feasible in humans, several previous modeling approaches have applied image-derived PV blood curves (34–36). However, this approach is prone to imaging artifacts such as partial volume effects or respiratory motion, which are challenging to correct for and which may affect the accuracy of the model-derived parameter estimates. Therefore, we evaluated in our study an approach which relied on a mathematically derived DIF obtained from the sampled AIF. The estimated DIF was computed as a combination of the AIF and the PV contribution to the liver blood supply. The mathematical model used to obtain the PV concentration as a function of time was previously validated in pigs for other radiotracers. The β parameter that allowed the computation of the concentration in the PV (Eqs. 1 and 2) is radiotracer specific and can be experimentally determined if blood samples from the PV and from an artery are obtained. A high β value means loss of radiotracer in the intestine which may be due to transporter-mediated active secretion into the intestinal lumen, resulting in a low PV input function as compared to the AIF (Supplemental Fig. 15). On the other hand, a low β value would mean no or little loss of radiotracer in the intestinal lumen and comparable peaks of the PV and the AIF.

In previous studies with the radiolabeled conjugated bile acid [11C]cholylsarcosine, the β value was derived from studies in pigs, in which the PV blood curve was directly sampled, and then applied to the analysis of the human data, under the assumption that the β value does not differ between humans and pigs for this radiotracer. As for [11C]erlotinib no β value was available from experiments in pigs, we introduced β as a model parameter to be estimated, similar to the approach by Winterdahl et al.. However, our results showed high inter-individual variability of the β parameter as well as a large %CV (Tables I, II, III, and IV) indicating that its estimation might not be accurate. Our β estimates ranged from 0.6 to 2.2 min which was in comparable range to previously described radiotracers in pigs ([11C]methylglucose, 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-d-galactose, [15O]water), which showed some degree of loss upon intestinal passage. In fact, in the case of [11C]erlotinib, active intestinal secretion may be mediated by ABCG2 and ABCB1 located in the luminal membrane of the intestinal epithelial cells. These assumptions are supported by previous data published by Bauer et al., which showed a reduction in the intestinal concentration of radioactivity in the PET scan performed after oral pre-treatment with unlabeled erlotinib presumably due to partial saturation of ABCG2/ABCB1-mediated intestinal secretion of [11C]erlotinib. However, as our β estimates were not very reliable, no firm conclusions can be drawn regarding changes in β values between scans. Interestingly, the fitting results (see Figs. 2 and 4) did not present any substantial improvements for the implementation of the DIF as compared with the use of only the AIF. Nevertheless, slightly lower AIC values were obtained when implementing the mathematically derived DIF for most of the individuals, which indicated that the DIF represented more accurately the true liver input function. The fact that the PV input function has a considerably lower peak than the AIF (Supplemental Fig. 15) resulted in an increase of k1 estimates from the AIF to the DIF approach (Tables I, II, III, and IV). However, as we were not able to directly obtain the PV input function in humans to experimentally validate the mathematically derived DIF, using the AIF as the model input may serve as a valid alternative to represent the hepatic disposition of [11C]erlotinib. In this way, uncertainties in the model results arising from the β parameter can be avoided. However, depending on the characteristics of the radiotracer, inclusion of the DIF might be essential in order to obtain accurate model fits. Therefore, future efforts should be directed towards improved measurement of image-derived PV input functions in humans.

In addition to the model input function, kinetic models for PET typically involve one or two compartments that describe the kinetics of the radiotracer in the tissue of interest. The one-tissue compartment model (two-compartment) describes the bidirectional flux of radiotracer between blood and tissue, while the two-tissue compartment model (three-compartment) includes a second tissue compartment that represents additional binding and/or metabolism of the radiotracer inside the tissue. In our study, we assumed that no metabolism of [11C]erlotinib occurred over the short duration of the PET scan, so that the model represented the exchange of unmetabolized radiotracer between different compartments. This assumption was supported by previous data in humans showing that the majority of radioactivity in plasma (> 95% at all studied time points) was found to be composed of unmetabolized [11C]erlotinib both for baseline PET scans and for PET scans acquired after administration of unlabeled erlotinib or rifampicin. Moreover, in mice and rats, chromatographic analysis revealed that the majority of radioactivity in liver tissue homogenate (approximately 60% in mice at 25 min after radiotracer injection and approximately 96% in rats at 15 min after radiotracer injection) represented unchanged [11C]erlotinib. The models developed in this work included an additional compartment that did represent not only the state of the radiotracer in the liver but also its secretion into the extrahepatic bile duct and gall bladder. Two models were employed in this study: a 4C model (three tissue compartments, Fig. 1a) and a 3C model (two tissue compartments, Fig. 1b). In the 4C model, the intrahepatic bile duct and the eBD/GB were considered as distinct compartments with rate constants describing the transfer of radiotracer from the liver into the intrahepatic bile duct (k3) and from the latter into the eBD/GB (k5). The radiotracer PK in eBD/GB was directly measured in the PET scans and therefore included into the model analysis, while the intrahepatic bile ducts represented a compartment that was not directly visible in the PET scans. The transporter-mediated secretion of [11C]erlotinib into bile as mediated by canalicular hepatocyte ABC transporters should therefore be primarily reflected by the k3 parameter. On the other hand, in the 3C model, the liver compartment and the intrahepatic bile duct compartment were lumped together, so that the k3 parameter mainly reflected the transfer of radiotracer from the hepatocytes into the eBD/GB.

The [11C]erlotinib + erlotinib PET data analyzed in this study have already been kinetically evaluated utilizing another 3C model, which did not provide satisfactory fits of the liver and eBD/GB data. In contrast to this, our results showed that both employed models could appropriately represent the radiotracer kinetics in the liver and in the eBD/GB. However, the 4C model better represented the decrease in liver distribution of radiotracer in scan 2, in which [11C]erlotinib was administered after oral pre-treatment with unlabeled erlotinib. Previously conducted in vitro transport studies demonstrated that SLCO2B1 is a high-affinity, low-capacity transporter of [11C]erlotinib. This led to the suggestion that hepatic SLCO2B1 contributed, next to passive diffusion, to uptake of [11C]erlotinib from the blood into the liver as reflected by a decrease in the liver-to-blood ratio of [11C]erlotinib when an oral therapeutic dose of unlabeled erlotinib was given before the PET scan. Counterintuitively, the previous kinetic analysis had shown that the decrease in liver concentrations observed in scan 2 was reflected by an increase in k2, rather than by a decrease in k1, as would be expected from saturation of a hepatic uptake transporter. The lack of a k1 reduction in scan 2 has been explained in a way that initial liver uptake of [11C]erlotinib was mainly mediated by passive diffusion with only a small contribution by SLCO2B1. It has been hypothesized that the increase in k2 was caused by saturation of SLCO2B1 activity, which decreased the ability of [11C]erlotinib to re-enter from the blood into the liver after the initial uptake phase. Importantly, all compartment models evaluated in this study corroborated the k2 increase in scan 2 obtained in the previous analysis (Fig. 3). Moreover, the two employed 3C models revealed a significant reduction of k3 in scan 2 (Fig. 3). This decrease in k3 was also significant in the 4C DIF model when the baseline scan values from both studies (erlotinib and rifampicin) were grouped in a single baseline scan and compared to the values from the scan with the co-administration of erlotinib (Supplemental Fig. 16). Such a k3 reduction was not obtained in the previous analysis, but would be expected based on previously published preclinical PET data in mice. In the mouse study, co-injection of [11C]erlotinib with unlabeled erlotinib (10 mg/kg) led to a pronounced reduction in CLH,efflux of [11C]erlotinib, determined with integration plot analysis, presumably due to saturation of ABCG2/ABCB1-mediated transport of [11C]erlotinib from the liver into the bile.

For the second study, in which [11C]erlotinib PET scans were performed after administration of the prototypical SLCO transporter inhibitor rifampicin, there were no significant changes in the uptake or backflux of the radiotracer between the blood and the liver (Fig. 5). This contrasted with a previous analysis based on integration plot analysis and kinetic modeling using a liver model implemented in freely available iFit software (www.liver.dk/ifit.html), which revealed a moderate reduction of k1 in the scan recorded after rifampicin infusion. This moderate effect of rifampicin on k1 was attributed to rifampicin exerting only a weak inhibitory effect on SLCO2B1 at the attained plasma concentrations, as opposed to its strong inhibitory effect on SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3, for which [11C]erlotinib is not a substrate. The k1 reduction was further supported by data in mice, which received a higher dose of rifampicin than for the human study leading to a pronounced decrease in k1. Our present data also showed a trend for k1 decreases, but statistical significance was not reached, most likely due to the small sample size of the study (Fig. 5). However, when k1 values from the baseline scan in both studies (erlotinib and rifampicin) were grouped as a single baseline scan, the reduction in k1 when rifampicin was co-administered became significant in all the implemented models except in the 3C AIF (Supplemental Fig. 16). In accordance with the previous analysis, we found in the employed 4C models a significant reduction in k3, which was most likely caused by inhibition of ABCG2/ABCB1-mediated secretion of [11C]erlotinib from the liver into the bile by rifampicin.

Hepatic uptake and efflux clearances were also calculated for every implemented model (Supplemental Tables II and IV). Changes in CLH,uptake were similar to the k1 changes in both studies. While there were no significant changes in CLH,uptake when unlabeled erlotinib was administered before the second scan, there was a trend for a decrease in CLH,uptake when rifampicin was administered before the second scan, which was consistent with a weak inhibitory effect of rifampicin on SLCO2B1-mediated hepatic uptake of [11C]erlotinib. The CLH,uptake values, when the DIF was implemented, were of the same order of magnitude as the liver blood flow (21 mL/min/kg body weight). However, the CLH,uptake values for the AIF model were considerably higher than those of the hepatic artery blood flow (4.3 mL/min/kg body weight) but much lower than those of the total liver blood flow. This indicated that the mathematical approximation of the DIF using the model-derived PV input function and the sampled AIF might be more accurate to represent the uptake mechanisms of [11C]erlotinib than only the use of the AIF. The value of CLH,efflux between the 3C model and the 4C model cannot be directly compared since the clearance is calculated from different rate constants (k3 in 3C model and k5 in 4C model) and from different physiological volumes (liver tissue volume and intrahepatic bile duct volume for the 3C and 4C models, respectively) corresponding to the defined compartments. This caused a significant reduction in CLH,efflux from the 3C to the 4C model since the volume in the intrahepatic bile duct (Vih) was defined as 3.2 mL of bile per liter of liver tissue.

Both data sets have been previously analyzed using a graphical analysis method termed integration plot analysis. This approach allows determining the clearances or the rate constants for initial uptake of radioactivity from the blood into the liver and for efflux of radioactivity from the liver into the bile and has been used in several other studies to assess the impact of liver transporters on the liver kinetics of different PET tracers. We found a significant positive correlation between the kinetic parameters obtained in this study (using AIF) with the respective values from integration plot analysis (Supplemental Fig. 17). However, integration plot analysis is based on arterial blood, so that kuptake,liver values do not represent the transfer rate constant from sinusoidal blood into the liver. Moreover, the rate constant describing the backflux of radioactivity from the liver into the blood (k2) cannot be determined using integration plot analysis. For certain drugs, this parameter may be influenced by the activity of efflux transporters located in the basolateral membrane of hepatocytes (e.g., multidrug resistance-associated proteins 3 and 4, ABCC3 and ABCC4) and is therefore of major relevance to be determined. Moreover, the estimation of kefflux,liver is not straightforward in some occasions using integration plot analysis since a linear phase of the plot cannot be always identified leading to inconclusive results.

An alternative approach to analyze the present data may be the implementation of a population-based PK model, which may facilitate the statistical comparison of the individual models, enable a better comparison of the parameter estimates using a covariate approach, and finally improve the identifiability of the β parameter. Even though population-based PK models usually involve large numbers of heterogeneous patients in which few samples are taken per individual so that it is not possible to characterize the individual’s PK, such models have also been previously applied to PET data (41–43). However, as population-based PK modeling requires dedicated software packages, which are not available to us, this analysis was not pursued in the present study.

As shown in this study, compartment analysis of PET data can be used to assess transporter-mediated DDIs in the liver. It can be anticipated that our analysis approach may also be applicable to assess pathophysiological changes or polymorphisms in the transporter-encoding genes as sources of PK variability. Our models may also find application to assess hepatic disposition of other radiolabeled drugs or to obtain improved readouts for diagnostic liver PET or SPECT tracers.
