
Abstract

A private testing laboratory reported in a Citizen Petition (CP) to FDA that 16 of 38 metformin drug products they tested had N-nitrosodimethyl amine (NDMA) amounts above the allowable intake (AI) of 96 ng/day. Because the FDA had been monitoring drugs for nitrosamines, orthogonal analytical procedures had been developed, validated and applied to detect the following nitrosamines in metformin drug products (if present): (i) NDMA (with a dedicated method) or (ii) NDMA (with a second confirmatory method), N-nitroso-diethylamine (NDEA), N-ethyl-N-nitroso-2-propanamine (NEIPA), N-nitroso-diisopropylamine (NDIPA), N-nitroso-di-n-propylamine (NDPA), N-nitroso-methylphenylamine (NMPA), N-nitroso-di-n-butylamine (NDBA) and N-nitroso-N-methyl-4-aminobutyric acid (NMBA). In contrast to the private laboratory results, FDA testing on the same set of 38 samples with orthogonal procedures observed amounts over the AI in only 8 of the 38 products and generally observed lower values than reported by the private testing laboratory. As described here, the investigation into the cause of the discrepancy revealed that N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) can interfere with NDMA measurements. The data showed that the use of sufficient mass accuracy in the data acquisition and appropriate mass tolerance setting in the data processing to assure the selectivity of mass spectrometry measurements of NDMA in the presence of co-eluting DMF was necessary to prevent overestimation of the level of NDMA in metformin drug products. Overall, care should be taken to assure the necessary specificity in analytical procedures for adequate assessment of the nitrosamine level in drug products that also contain DMF or other potential interfering substances.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00473-w) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.





Discussion

The private laboratory reported testing results to the Agency in a Citizen Petition. The FDA responded to the Citizen Petition by testing these products and noted different results (although 8 of the 38 samples from 5 firms did have NDMA amounts above the AI). In this set of 38 samples, only the ER products had detectable NDMA amounts as tested by FDA. The Agency responded by requesting voluntary recalls from the firms manufacturing these products. These firms complied with the request. Subsequently, the private laboratory hypothesized that because the FDA had not used a stable isotope-enriched standard for NDMA in the FDA method the agencies results were an underestimation of the NDMA amounts in the US metformin supply. In addition, the private laboratory “crowd sourced” samples from the US market tested them using the same method described above and provided the results in a non-peer reviewed preprint manuscript which reported amounts of NDMA above the AI in 36% of the metformin drugs tested. As described in this study, the use of a stable isotope enriched standard for NDMA as internal control did not prevent the co-elution of DMF from causing overestimation of the NDMA amounts in many products when using the private laboratory approach.

The results of FDA’s analytical procedure validation experiments showed that the FDA tests developed to measure the nitrosamine amounts in metformin drugs had adequate analytical procedure performance. Furthermore as an added check, the FDA developed orthogonal methods that used different ionization sources for the MS detection and different chromatographic conditions (columns/gradients). Comparable results were observed across these measurements on the private laboratory samples. If there were matrix effects with one method, these would be unlikely to be the same with a second method. These findings provide a high degree of confidence in the accuracy of the FDA methods and measurements that have been developed and performed, respectively.

Importantly, the presence of an interfering substance like DMF co-eluting with NDMA needs to be addressed in the analytical procedure in the settings of the mass spectrometer detection parameters and in the analysis of the data. For HRMS-based quantitation, mass resolution and mass accuracy applied in the data acquisition and mass tolerance used in the data processing have an interwoven impact on the outcome as demonstrated in the data reported here. The experimental data showed that in the case of co-elution between DMF and NDMA, without a sufficient mass accuracy in the data acquisition and/or sufficient mass tolerance in data analysis, the test signal would be higher than the true value of NDMA because the integrated EIC peak area would be higher by 0.4% of the DMF present in the sample and would yield a false higher signal.
