
Abstract

The ex vivo isolated perfused rat lung (IPL) model has been demonstrated to be a useful tool during drug development for studying pulmonary drug absorption. This study aims to investigate the potential use of IPL data to predict rat in vivo lung absorption. Absorption parameters determined from IPL data (ex vivo input parameters) in combination with intravenously determined pharmacokinetic data were used in a biopharmaceutics model to predict experimental rat in vivo plasma concentration-time profiles and lung amount after inhalation of five different inhalation compounds. The performance of simulations using ex vivo input parameters was compared with simulations using in vitro input parameters, to determine whether and to what extent predictability could be improved by using input parameters determined from the more complex ex vivo model. Simulations using ex vivo input parameters were within twofold average difference (AAFE < 2) from experimental in vivo data for all compounds except one. Furthermore, simulations using ex vivo input parameters performed significantly better than simulations using in vitro input parameters in predicting in vivo lung absorption. It could therefore be advantageous to base predictions of drug performance on IPL data rather than on in vitro data during drug development to increase mechanistic understanding of pulmonary drug absorption and to better understand how different substance properties and formulations might affect in vivo behavior of inhalation compounds.



INTRODUCTION

Pulmonary drug delivery is the preferred administration route for the treatment of lung diseases such as asthma, chronic obstructive lung disease, and cystic fibrosis. Optimal pulmonary drug delivery of locally acting active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) includes high local concentration, extended lung residence time, and low systemic concentration. These properties enhance the pharmacological effect and decrease the dosing frequency, which improves compliance and reduces the risk of systemically adverse effects. To ensure the efficient and successful development of inhalation drug products, improved knowledge about the pulmonary drug absorption, i.e., dissolution, permeability, and tissue retention of the API in the lungs, is needed.

The isolated perfused rat lung (IPL) model is an ex vivo absorption model that allows parameters like epithelial permeability, solubility in epithelial lining fluid (ELF), dissolution rate, and particle wetting as well as tissue retention to be determined by computational analysis. The advantages of the IPL model over in vivo inhalation studies is that the lung-delivered dose can be closely controlled without passing the nose and the lung deposited dose can be measured directly by mass balance calculations. In addition, the effects of systemic disposition are excluded in the IPL model, because the pulmonary drug absorption is measured directly in the pulmonary vein. A physiological difference between the IPL model and the in vivo situation is that the systemic circulation, which supplies the bronchial region with blood, is not perfused in the IPL model. However, the drug absorption rate for solutes has previously been shown to correlate well between the IPL model and in vivo studies, which suggest that parameters obtained from the IPL model are potentially in vivo predictive. These advantages suggest that the IPL model may offer better opportunities than the more complex in vivo method for investigating drug absorption rate and mechanisms for solutes and different inhalation formulations.

Physiologically based biopharmaceutics (PBB) models are used to mechanistically describe absorption processes and can be used to simulate and predict drug absorption. These models require various drug absorption properties as input parameters, which can be either calculated from physicochemical properties or obtained from experimental measurements. For PBB models of inhaled drugs, lung absorption input parameters are commonly based on in vitro measurements. For example, permeability can be measured with cell monolayer models, tissue retention can be measured with tissue slices, and the dissolution rate can be based on solubility measures (11–13). In vitro measurements can be performed on a large scale while remaining cost-effective and are therefore well suited for predictions early in drug development. Some studies have shown that in vitro–based predictions can perform with high accuracy in predicting both in vivo and clinical plasma concentrations. However, there are still knowledge gaps in the use of input parameters in pulmonary absorption predictions. Absorption input parameters obtained from a more physiologically relevant experimental model like the IPL, might improve the predictive performance of PBB models, and also allow key factors relevant specifically to pulmonary absorption input parameters to be studied. Especially in later stages of drug development, the IPL can be useful in providing absorption data of for example different formulations.

The primary objective of this study was to investigate the potential use of IPL data to predict rat in vivo lung absorption. Absorption parameters determined from IPL data (ex vivo input parameters) were used in combination with intravenously determined pharmacokinetic data in the PBB model LungSim to predict experimental rat in vivo plasma concentration-time profiles and retained lung amount after inhalation of five different inhalation compounds. Simulations that used ex vivo input parameters were compared with simulations that used in vitro input parameters, to examine whether predictability improved when using input parameters determined from the more complex model.



DISCUSSION

Lung-specific absorption parameters obtained via the IPL model were used to simulate rat in vivo plasma concentration-time profile and lung amount for five different inhalation compounds. Simulations were within 2-fold absolute average error (AAFE) of the experimental in vivo rat data, with the exception of fluticasone propionate, indicating that drug absorption parameters obtained from the IPL model are predictive of in vivo lung absorption. Simulations using in vitro input parameters were compared with simulations using ex vivo input parameters, and those based on ex vivo parameters were significantly more accurate (as indicated by lower AAFE values) for the investigated APIs (except for salmeterol where the difference in AAFE was insignificant). These results demonstrate the advantage of the IPL method over in vitro methods for determining input parameters for predictions of in vivo plasma concentration-time profile and lung amount. In contrast to in vitro models, the IPL model resembles the in vivo dissolution better because it offers physiologically relevant volume, fluid composition, and sink/non-sink conditions. IPL also resembles in vivo permeability better because the epithelial membrane is the same as would be found in an in vivo experiment; for similar reasons, IPL resembles in vivo tissue retention better than in vitro because it offers the same volume, tissue composition, and dynamic binding processes. In addition, IPL includes the diversity and complexity of lung structure, including differences in the abovementioned parameters between the alveolar and tracheobronchial regions.

IPL is an advanced ex vivo model closely mimicking the in vivo lung physiology because it includes continuous lung breaths and the lung is perfused. One significant difference between IPL and in vivo experiments is that the bronchial region is not perfused in IPL; however, absorption parameters obtained from IPL have been shown to be predictive of in vivo lung absorption. Because the amount absorbed in IPL has reached near-complete absorption in several studies, it has been suggested that drug can be absorbed from the bronchial region, despite this region is not being perfused. Such a result might be explained by drug transport from the bronchial region through anastomoses and/or diffusion to the alveolar capillaries. Increasing permeability in the tracheobronchial region for the simulations improved predictions (lower AAFE) for three out of five investigated APIs. Based on that result, it seems that the lack of bronchial perfusion in IPL does not necessarily slow absorption in this region, lending further evidence that IPL successfully mimics the in vivo condition.

The absorptive surface area in the tracheobronchial region is much smaller than in the alveolar region, which is why simulated absorption from the tracheobronchial region was significantly slower than the simulated absorption from the alveolar region for the studied drugs (Table II). The difference in absorption between the two lung regions was even greater for the simulations using in vitro input parameters, because the pulmonary Peff in that case was scaled with the thickness of the epithelium (Table II).

The in vitro Peff value was calculated from a correlation between human intestinal Peff and Caco-2 Papp, which has often been used for biopharmaceutics intestinal absorption prediction, while the ex vivo Peff value was estimated from IPL data using the IPL PBB model. The two methods used to obtain a Peff value rendered significantly different values, especially when comparing the values for the alveolar region. The effect of this difference in Peff value between simulations using in vitro or ex vivo input parameter could be seen for the alveolar absorption of solutions, which was much higher for the in vitro simulations (Fig. 4). However, the high in vitro Peff value was compensated by a high tissue retention for salmeterol, resulting in a slower overall absorption rate. Similarly, Peff would have a low impact on the overall absorption rate if dissolution is the rate-limiting step, which is the case for low solubility APIs. The difference in Peff was smaller in the tracheobronchial region because of the scaling of the value in the in vitro simulations. Scaling of Peff value between the lung regions was attempted in the IPL PBB model but this revised model was not able to explain the experimental data obtained from IPL (data not shown). In the simulations using in vitro input parameters, both salbutamol and salmeterol were absorption limited by retention in the lung tissue in the tracheobronchial region despite a big difference in fu,tissue between the two APIs. This indicates that the permeability on the basolateral side of the membrane (i.e., transport from the membrane into the bloodstream) could be rate-limiting for APIs with low permeability and high fu,tissue. The effect of the permeability value on the overall absorption rate of solutions can be seen when comparing the ex vivo simulation of AZD5423 to the simulations of salbutamol and salmeterol. AZD5423, with a higher Peff value, has a higher absorption rate in both lung regions compared with salbutamol and salmeterol.

The setting for tissue retention differed between simulations using ex vivo and in vitro input parameters because of the nature of the experimental data. Dynamic distribution was applied for the ex vivo simulations and equilibrium distribution was applied for in vitro simulations. When lung tissue distribution is fast, as for example with AZD5423, no significant difference between the two settings was observed. In contrast, for APIs like salbutamol with slow distribution, significant differences between the settings will occur (data not shown). For example, if an equilibrium distribution is applied, salbutamol will be highly retained in the tissue because fu,tissue is very low, while if a dynamic distribution is applied, retention will be low because the rate of distribution is low (Table II). Predictiveness may be improved by measuring dynamic distribution in lung slices rather than equilibrium distribution, which will also better represent the actual absorption process.

The solubility used in the in vitro simulations was lower than in the ex vivo simulations, which resulted in a higher amount of API remaining as solid in the in vitro simulations (Fig. 4, Table III). In the in vitro simulations of APIs administered as suspensions (where dissolution was the rate-limiting step), the applied solubility seemed to be too low, as indicated by the low values for Cmax and AUC. Solubility in phosphate buffer pH 7.4 might not represent solubility in lung lining fluid, and a more optimal input value for solubility needs to be found if simulations and models are to be improved.

The systematic exposure predictions in Fig. 2 based on the ex vivo input parameters performed well in predicting in vivo lung absorption, although they have ex vivo model origin. However, predicted and observed values were not identical, and additional investigation is required. One possible source of deviation is that the IPL and in vivo models used different administration techniques and inhalation devices, which would result in different deposition patterns in the lungs, which in turn would likely affect absorption. The deposition pattern was an approximate estimation for both the in vivo and IPL data, and so simulations using different deposition patterns were also performed to test the effect on simulated absorption. Deposition pattern did affect the plasma concentration, especially Cmax, and clearly, it is important to have a good estimate of deposition pattern; however, there is little experimental data to validate any given pattern.

Another possible source of difference is that the API batches were not identical for IPL and in vivo experiments, which could affect the dissolution rates. Differences in particle size distribution were accounted for in the simulations, but differences in other factors like shape and agglomeration behavior could not be accounted for because there was no available data on these factors. Another potentially important difference is that the lungs in IPL are excised from the rat body and are therefore composed of dying tissue. This tissue has been shown to be viable for several hours, but the loss in viability over time might alter absorption compared with the living tissue in vivo. Finally, it is difficult to simulate and predict in vivo plasma concentration-time profiles when the in vivo data are obtained from nose-only inhalation experiments, because the lung-delivered dose can only be an approximate estimate. Both the simulations using ex vivo and in vitro input parameters had lower Cmax and AUC values than the in vivo data for two out of three of the APIs administered with nose-only inhalation, which suggests that the dosage applied in the simulations might be too low.
