
Abstract

Glomerular filtration (GF) and active tubular secretion (ATS) contribute to renal drug elimination, with the latter remaining understudied across the pediatric age range. Therefore, we systematically analyzed the influence of transporter ontogeny on the relative contribution of GF and ATS to renal clearance CLR for drugs with different properties in children. A physiology-based model for CLR in adults was extrapolated to the pediatric population by including maturation functions for the system-specific parameters. This model was used to predict GF and ATS for hypothetical drugs with a range of drug-specific properties, including transporter-mediated intrinsic clearance (CLint,T) values, that are substrates for renal secretion transporters with different ontogeny patterns. To assess the impact of transporter ontogeny on ATS and total CLR, a percentage prediction difference (%PD) was calculated between the predicted CLR in the presence and absence of transporter ontogeny. The contribution of ATS to CLR ranges between 41 and 90% in children depending on fraction unbound and CLint,T values. If ontogeny of renal transporters is < 0.2 of adult values, CLR predictions are unacceptable (%PD > 50%) for the majority of drugs regardless of the pediatric age. Ignoring ontogeny patterns of secretion transporters increasing with age in children younger than 2 years results in CLR predictions that are not systematically acceptable for all hypothetical drugs (%PD > 50% for some drugs). This analysis identified for what drug-specific properties and at what ages the contribution of ATS on total pediatric CLR cannot be ignored. Drugs with these properties may be sensitive in vivo probes to investigate transporter ontogeny.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00468-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Between 21 and 31% of marketed drugs are primarily renally cleared . Processes underlying renal clearance (CLR) include glomerular filtration (GF), active tubular secretion (ATS), reabsorption, and renal metabolism. Maturation of GF has been extensively studied and quantified in children. However, less is known about the impact of maturation in the other process on CLR, partly due to the lack of specific biomarkers to distinguish between the activity of different transporters and to the overlap in specificity of transporters for different substrates Together with GF, ATS is one of the major contributing pathways for CLR; ontogeny of ATS is therefore the focus of the current analysis.

ATS involves different transporter systems located on the basolateral and apical sides of the proximal tubule cells of the kidney. These systems enable the efflux of drugs from the blood into the tubule where pre-urine is formed . The expression of renal transporters was found to change in children . However, these findings are based on a limited number of postmortem kidney samples collected throughout the pediatric age range . Furthermore, there is limited information about the relationship between transporter-specific protein expression and transporter activity or whether this remains constant with age. Finally, the extent to which transporter activity impacts ATS and subsequently total CLR has not been quantified yet for the pediatric population.

Physiology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models integrate prior knowledge on drug and system properties. This configuration can be leveraged to perform extrapolations to unstudied scenarios. For example, PBPK models can be back-extrapolated to the pediatric population by taking into account the developmental changes in system parameters and be further used to make predictions in this special population for drugs that have not been studied in children yet. Previously, our group has used PBPK approaches in an innovative manner to systematically assess in which situations empirical scaling methods (i.e., allometric scaling, linear scaling) could be used to accurately scale plasma clearance of drugs that were eliminated by hepatic metabolism or GF for a broad range of hypothetical drugs . However, due to limited information on the ontogeny of renal transporters, the accuracy of clearance scaling for drugs eliminated through ATS could not be addressed.

Using a similar PBPK-based modeling approach as the one described above, we performed a systematic analysis to investigate the impact of the ontogeny of renal secretion transporters in relation with maturation of other physiological processes on the relative contribution of GF and ATS to CLR as well as on the total CLR. This assessment was performed throughout the pediatric age range for a large number of hypothetical drugs with different properties covering a realistic parameter space. Moreover, to assess the impact of renal transporter ontogeny on CLR throughout the pediatric population, we compared CLR predictions obtained with and without including ontogeny patterns for renal transporters.



DISCUSSION

A PBPK-based framework was used to predict CLR of hypothetical drugs with various properties that are substrates for renal secretion transporters throughout the pediatric age range. This approach provided insight on the contribution of GF and ATS to the total pediatric CLR. In addition, the impact of ignoring this transporter ontogeny in predicting CLR in children was quantified.

The physiology-based model for CLR used in the presented framework was developed based on a model published for adults that was extended to the pediatric population by including maturation functions for the system-specific parameters as shown in Table 1 and illustrated in Fig. 1a. This model included two major contributing pathways to CLR: GF and ATS. Based on this model, we could quantify the impact of transporter ontogeny on pediatric drug clearance for all current and future small molecule drugs, based on drug-specific properties alone. We found that the contribution of these pathways to CLR increases nonlinearly throughout the pediatric age range, with the steepest increase during the first year of life, even in the absence of transporter ontogeny. These changes in pediatric CLR are determined by the influence of maturation in the system-specific parameters underlying GF and ATS as well as by drug-specific properties (Fig. 2). Both GF and ATS increase with increasing fu, while ATS also increases with increasing CLint,T values.

Drug fu was found to have a major influence on CLR through both investigated pathways but especially on CLR through GF. CLint,T has a major influence on CLR only through ATS. Drugs with 10-fold different CLint,T values and low binding to plasma proteins (fu,adult = 0.95) yield different contributions of ATS to CLR. When ATS contribution to CLR is limited only by the activity and the abundance of transporters (i.e., CLint,T changes between 5 and 50 μL/min/mg protein), an increase of 1.9-fold in average ATS contribution was observed. As CLint,T changes between 50 and 500 μL/min/mg protein, we observed a lower increase in average ATS contribution of only 1.1-fold . This behavior could be explained by the fact that fu and CLint,sec are rate limiting factors for ATS when CLint,sec x fu is low relative to QR (i.e., permeability-limited process). QR becomes the rate limiting factor for ATS when CLint,sec x fu becomes highl in comparison to QR (i.e., perfusion-limited process).This also explains why the impact of ignoring transporter ontogeny decreases for drugs with very high CLint,T, as shown by the lower %PD values in Fig. 3. It is important to mention that the process limiting ATS may change with age, whether ATS is permeability-limited (CLR/QR < 0.3) or perfusion-limited (CLR/QR > 0.7) or a combination between the two processes, 0.3 < CLR/QR < 0.7, as shown in Fig. 5.Fig. 5Ratio of total renal clearance (CLR) and renal blood flow (Q) for 9 representative hypothetical drugs. Results are presented for drugs binding to human serum albumin (HSA) (circles) or to α-acid glycoprotein (AGP) (faded triangles)

Fig. 5

Ratio of total renal clearance (CLR) and renal blood flow (Q) for 9 representative hypothetical drugs. Results are presented for drugs binding to human serum albumin (HSA) (circles) or to α-acid glycoprotein (AGP) (faded triangles)

The present framework explored a broad parameter space for ontogeny of transporters. By keeping ontogeny of transporters constant with age, the potential impact of ignoring ontogeny on predicting CLR was systematically explored (Fig. 3). This exploration highlights that an ontogeny below 0.2 of the adult value cannot be ignored for the majority of drugs regardless of the pediatric age. In this situation, the assumption that there are no differences in transporter ontogeny between children and adults would lead to unacceptable CLR predictions. Data characterizing how ontogeny of individual kidney transporters changes across the pediatric age is scarce in literature. Cheung et al. recently took the first steps in quantifying the ontogeny of protein abundance for individual renal transporters. According to this report, which is based on a limited sample size, BCRP, MATE1, MATE2-K, and GLUT2 have protein abundance levels similar to the adult levels throughout the studied pediatric age range , meaning that ontT = 1 for children of all ages and that transporter ontogeny is not a factor of influence in predicting CLR for substrates of these transporters. Including these ontogeny profiles in the current framework increased our understanding on the role of age-dependent ontogeny in predicting CLR (Fig. 4). As reported by Cheung et al., the ontogeny of OAT1 and OAT3 is slower than the ontogeny of OCT2 and P-gp. Ignoring OCT2 ontogeny yields systematically acceptable pediatric CLR values for all its hypothetical substrates in children from 3 months and older. For P-gp substrates, the same holds true in children from 6 months and older. Ontogeny of OATs however cannot be ignored for children younger than 2 years as CLR predictions are not systematically acceptable for substrates of this transporter. The CLR predictions obtained with the aggregate transporter function published by DeWoskin et al. are in line with the results for OATs. The aggregate function of Hayton et al. suggests a much slower ontogeny leading to CLR predictions that are not systematically acceptable in children up to and including 5 years. CLR predictions with Hayton et al. [ 12] diverge from the predictions obtained with the other transporter ontogeny functions since it was the first function to quantify the ontogeny of ATS and has a different profile than all the other studied functions. Disregarding ontogeny of transporters leads to over-predictions of CLR in young patients. If these predicted CLR values were used as the basis for pediatric dose adjustments, these could lead to overexposure to drugs and, eventually, increase the risk of toxic events.

As our analysis identifies drugs for which CLR is sensitive to transporter ontogeny, the proposed framework can also be used to find and select drugs with relevant properties to serve as in vivo probes for the quantification of the ontogeny of transporters underlying ATS. From the results of the current analysis, we could conclude that the best probe drugs should have a CLint,T of 5–50 μL/min/mg protein and medium to high fraction unbound in adults (fu,adults = 0.55–0.95). Drugs for which GF is the main elimination pathway or drugs with extremely high CLint,T that cause renal blood flow to be limiting for elimination will have a limited use in characterizing ontogeny profiles. These guidelines could be the basis for future research aiming to derive ontogeny of individual renal transporters in vivo.

Our results rely on the validity of the PBPK approach, which is currently considered the “gold standard” for clearance predictions in the absence of clinical data. This approach gives an overview of the impact of system- and drug-specific parameters on CLR. The explored arrays of ontogeny fractions and of drug properties were realistic; however, unrealistic combinations of drug properties could have been generated. As with the previously published hepatic PBPK framework , this analysis does not include measures for the variability or uncertainty of the parameters that constitute the PBPK model, to highlight the impact of system- and drug-specific changes in the absence of variability and uncertainty. Our approach could be extended for investigations on the impact of variability and uncertainty by including variability terms on the system-specific parameters and performing stochastic simulations. Finally, PBPK modeling is ideally suitable to study the impact of specific physiological processes in a way that is not possible in vivo. In the in vivo situation, studies are limited to drugs that are currently available on the market and prescribed to children. However, generally these drugs are not eliminated in totality by one single pathway. Moreover, the accuracy of these observations is impacted by aspects related to study design, sampling, and analytical methods. Our current model-based analysis is not impacted by these limitations. The physiology-based model for CLR used here only included GF and ATS, but not passive permeability, reabsorption, or renal metabolism. This enabled the study of GF and ATS in isolation and reduced the noise and complexity of the results. The influence of ontogeny on transporters working in tandem or of reabsorption and kidney metabolism together with their dependencies on physiological properties, like pH at the tubule side, ionization, enzyme abundance, affinity, and maturation, could be explored in a similar manner in subsequent analyses.
