




Discussion

This study investigates the use of two-stage procedures for the reconstruction of massive acetabular defects, in case and in absence of infection. Our aim was to understand to what extent bony information obscured due to metal artefacts can affect the design of customised implants.

We compared 3D-CT scans taken of patients pre and post-implant removal and found that the bone shape changed in all cases. The medial acetabular wall was often missing from the interval 3D reconstruction (post implant removal) and acetabular rim definition was not clear on the 3D reconstructions derived from pre-implant-removal scans. Also, bone is inevitably removed during initial implant removal. These concomitant variables led, in some cases, to design modifications.

Two main problems arise when treating patients with massive acetabular defects: Poor visualisation of the acetabular defect and construct on computed tomography (CT) due to the presence of metal-related beam hardening artifacts and inevitable bone loss associated with removal of the failed implant at surgery, changing the architecture of the defect. This “new” intra-operative defect cannot be predicted on the pre-op CT.

The adoption of the two-stage procedure began with the treatment of patients for infection in the presence of a massive acetabular defect. Application of this technique was then expanded to cases where large amounts of metal work obscured the bone, making the designing greatly uncertain. Finally, we extended the indication to “end-of-road” reconstruction to do everything possible to increase the certainty of good fixation of the customised implant to the pelvis.

Comparison of pre and post-implant removal scans allowed us to estimate bone that was obscured by metal artefact or subsequently removed intraoperatively.

We observed that the virtual 3D-CT bony models changed in all cases. A prevalence of areas of the medial acetabular wall missing from the interval 3D reconstruction (post implant removal) was noted, whereas acetabular rim definition was not clear on the 3D reconstructions derived from pre-implant removal scans.

Although the overall innominate bone volumes did not change significantly between the two timepoints, the changes were predominately associated with the shape and distribution of the acetabular defects (Figs. 6 and 8). This is of clinical significance as it leads to implant design modifications and may ultimately change the surgical procedure and instruments needed. If not anticipated, these changes can presumably increase the surgical time and lead to poor implant fitting.

Previous studies have highlighted the difficulty of positioning a custom made implant accurately in patients with a massive acetabular defect . Reports on the clinical outcome in the literature are sparse. One of the main challenges is achieving accurate fitting to the patient’s host bone. Additive manufacturing has enabled the accurate production of bespoke titanium implants with integral porosity providing a fairly new tool to manage massive acetabular defects in revision hip surgery.

CT data is a potential source of error when designing and placing custom-made components in patients with massive acetabular defects . Despite advancements in CT technology, metal artefacts mislead the anatomical reconstruction by hiding bone portions or preventing a clear bone boundary reading. Difficulty following the preoperative plan, and press fitting the custom component, arise when intraoperative defect topography differed from that seen on CT.

There is no patient specific instrumentation or image technology solution to overcome the issue of reconstruction errors due to metal noise or to predict the amount and shape of bone removed at revision.

Two-stage revision THA is the gold standard to treat infection, or periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) [30–34]. The morbidity and mortality of patients undergoing a second-stage revision THA for the treatment of PJI is higher compared to single-stage surgery, linked to the necessity of two major surgical procedures. It has been observed that the main risk factors for a two-stage exchange failure include hemodialysis, obesity, multiple previous procedures, diabetes mellitus, corticosteroid therapy, hypoalbuminemia, blood transfusion, immunosuppression, rheumatological conditions, and coagulation disorders . These factors together with the aim to improve long-term clinical outcomes are always to be consider in case-by-case decision making.

We acknowledge the following limitations. Firstly, the two-stage surgical procedure, with pre-operative and interval CT scanning, doubles the radiation dose to the patients. This has constituted, and continues to be, a limiting aspect for the use of computed tomography. However, new CT scanners with optimized sequences have reduced the dose penalty by up to 50% . Secondly, manual segmentation can lead to errors in the reconstruction of the anatomy, due to a reliance on user selection of bony landmarks. However, segmentation of CT scans was performed by experienced engineers. Lastly, we acknowledge the small sample size of these extremely difficult cases, although our hospital constitutes the largest orthopaedic hospital in the UK, highlighting the rarity of their kind.
