
Abstract

The effect of food on pharmacokinetic properties of drugs is a commonly observed occurrence affecting about 40% of orally administered drugs. Within the pharmaceutical industry, significant resources are invested to predict and characterize a clinically relevant food effect. Here, the predictive performance of physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) food effect models was assessed via de novo mechanistic absorption models for 30 compounds using controlled, pre-defined in vitro, and modeling methodology. Compounds for which absorption was known to be limited by intestinal transporters were excluded in this analysis. A decision tree for model verification and optimization was followed, leading to high, moderate, or low food effect prediction confidence. High (within 0.8- to 1.25-fold) to moderate confidence (within 0.5- to 2-fold) was achieved for most of the compounds (15 and 8, respectively). While for 7 compounds, prediction confidence was found to be low (> 2-fold). There was no clear difference in prediction success for positive or negative food effects and no clear relationship to the BCS category of tested drug molecules. However, an association could be demonstrated when the food effect was mainly related to changes in the gastrointestinal luminal fluids or physiology, including fluid volume, motility, pH, micellar entrapment, and bile salts. Considering these findings, it is recommended that appropriately verified mechanistic PBPK modeling can be leveraged with high to moderate confidence as a key approach to predicting potential food effect, especially related to mechanisms highlighted here.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00508-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.





DISCUSSION

In this study, a unique prospective approach was proposed to build and verify mechanistic PBPK models for 30 compounds while controlling for common variables, such as model input parameters, method of data generation, and subjective optimization and/or verification. To focus the model development and verification around absorption parameters, compounds with known IV clearance were used. However, we believe in practice the models can be applied even in the absence of IV data if the food effect mechanism is primarily related to absorption events. The focus of this work was to identify mechanisms where high, moderate, and low confidence in the prediction of food effect can be expected. The levels of confidence were defined based on modeling approach and an assessment of how well the PK parameters and profiles were captured. In total, the food effect of 15 compounds was predicted with high confidence, 8 with moderate confidence, and 7 with low confidence. Areas of high to moderate confidence were mainly associated with food effect related to changes in GI luminal fluid and physiology, while lower confidence was commonly associated with complex mechanisms and/or interplay between multiple mechanisms for which standardized in vitro assays and model input are not available to characterize the food effect, as well as to develop and verify models and/or gaps exist in capturing these mechanisms in the modeling software utilized.

Compound types where food effect was not appropriately captured using the standardized approach proposed in this work were salts and some weak bases, for which optimizing the precipitation time of the drug could not address the low confidence in capturing the absorption profile and extent of food effect. One key point for the misprediction of food effect is the current gaps in software and/or biorelevant media to adequately reflect the impact of food and food components for poorly soluble drugs; while biorelevant media are widely accepted for providing a good estimate of the luminal solubility of poorly soluble drugs under fasted and fed state, there seem to be cases where the in vitro solubility of these media is not in line with the solubility in human intestinal fluids, and cases where the buffer species has a pronounced impact on the in vitro solubility and precipitation behavior of certain compounds. Specifically, the outcome of our modeling exercise suggests that the in vivo solubility of pazopanib in the GI tract may be higher compared with the measured in vitro FaSSIF solubility. Therefore, there is a need to further investigate more biorelevant media to improve PBPK-based absorption predictions at various prandial states.

In a typical clinical development paradigm, early assessment of food effect could be generated as early as the first-in-human single ascending dose studies. In oncologic drug development, dosing with food (typically a light meal) may be pursued from the beginning, particularly if an increase in exposure is needed or GI-related toxicity can be mitigated. Under current global regulatory paradigms, most companies are expected to re-characterize the food effect on the to-be-marketed formulation. Tistaert et al. previously proposed that following validation of the model against fasted and fed data that have been generated in early development, one could apply the model prospectively to account for food effect of new doses, formulations, or API forms. In this manuscript, we have built on these recommendations by highlighting opportunities where we find the translation of these models across formulations may be appropriate and where in vitro methodology and PBPK models may require further advancements in their approach to be adequately predictive. When the mechanisms of food effect can be categorized as high confidence, bottom-up, the PBPK models may be used for decision-making around food effect prior to FIH and also, it may not be required to perform a clinical anchor study (i.e., a specific food effect study in healthy volunteers under well-controlled conditions and powered to show bioequivalence). In such cases, the high confidence PBPK FE projections could still be confirmed with clinical data (e.g., an arm of fed subjects in a Ph1 study or a PopPK analysis of patient data). It is also worth noting that the relevant food effect in clinical use in the patient population may differ from that measured in an anchor study in healthy volunteers with a standard meal. Such drugs may include compounds where solubility is generally not rate-limiting and food effect (typically negative for Cmax) is primarily dictated by gastric emptying.

Mechanisms categorized as high confidence, middle-out may need to be verified using an anchor study before being used to predict food effect with high accuracy. However, there is still the possibility to avoid additional clinical studies around food effect after certain formulation or dose changes. Similarly, when models and mechanisms categorized as having moderate confidence (within 2-fold) are verified with an anchor study, there may be cases where minor formulation changes can be made without the need for additional FE studies. At this point, the nature of the formulation change should be considered. Formulation changes are commonplace during clinical development. While, on some occasions, major formulation changes may be pursued to address specific clinical needs (e.g., an “enabled” formulation to address the poor bioavailability of an early crystalline formulation), most formulation changes undertaken are more subtle. The formulation technology is typically decided early on and optimization focuses on the composition and manufacturing process. Based on the work presented in this manuscript, we propose that if the formulations follow the same dissolution/absorption principles (e.g., both formulations are based on crystalline API), translation of the models from early to late stage is possible especially when the mechanism of food effect (or lack thereof) is well understood (i.e., the defined confidence categories should hold). For many of the examples highlighted in this work, the formulation dissolution rate is not the determining factor for food effect. For rapid-dissolving formulations, food effect may be dictated by gastric emptying time (if sufficient solubility or administered as non-precipitating oral solution) or by the saturation solubility of the API in the fasted and fed condition. This is mostly independent of the formulation and would not be affected by many formulation changes. However, the authors acknowledge that the proposal to avoid clinical studies for minor formulation changes has been supported by only limited published examples and further work is recommended to verify this with a broader range of clinical data. While the primary application of such models is to describe the food effect in the context of biopharmaceutics characterization, on a case-by-case basis, these models can be considered for prospective application dependent on therapeutic margins and exact mechanism of food effect verified with the anchor study.

Like formulation changes, we believe that PBPK models could be applied to the projection of food effect at different doses than previously established. A properly qualified PPBK model across different doses would accurately account for absorption limitations (if applicable) and thus would be well-positioned to assess the impact of food at different doses than previously studied. An interesting question would be the application of food effect models to different meals (e.g., a moderate-fat, moderate-calorie meal). There are currently a relatively limited number of published examples systematically looking at parameterization of the models as a function of the meal content. The most detailed example is probably the study by Sutton et al. where the authors proposed adjustments to the gastric emptying and bile salt concentration settings in the PBPK model for different meals. Adopting such a model may be considered to interpolate exposures between the typically tested prandial states (i.e., fasted and high-fat/high-calorie meal). While this could help with simulating more real-life dosing conditions, it was out of scope of the work presented here.

Food effect prediction with a PBPK model seamlessly integrates in vitro data with knowledge of human physiology. Prior work has attempted food effect prediction from only in vitro data (54–56) or directly from animal models (56–58). While these methods have shown some success in predicting the direction of food effect, their ability to accurately capture the extent of food effect, and the impact of food on PK parameters and, especially, profiles have not been consistently demonstrated. While it makes sense to use all available data, including pre-clinical data (e.g., dog FE data), to inform predictions of human food effect, the focus of this study was to explore the predictive ability of PBPK models following a pure in vitro to in vivo approach. We present the application of standard PBPK platforms to accurately capture not only the direction of food effect but also the extent of the effect on the human PK profile. Given the complex nature of food effect, it is anticipated that an integrated approach such as PBPK, which captures the complexity of human physiology and disparate food effect mechanism, can serve as a key platform for the support of food effect predictions.

The study of food effect on the absorption of orally administered drugs is widespread and a key driver of study design, data analysis, and labeling language. Within the pharmaceutical industry, significant resources are invested to predict and characterize a clinically meaningful food effect, including the use of PBPK models to gain mechanistic insight into potential food effect. Here, the predictive performance of PBPK food effect models was assessed using de novo mechanistic absorption models for 30 compounds generated in accordance with controlled, pre-defined in vitro and modeling methodology, as well as an aligned decision tree for model design, verification, and optimization. Mechanistic PBPK models enabled food effect modeling of most of the compounds with high (50%) or moderate (27%) confidence, with a small subset of compounds showing low (23%) confidence in the prediction of food effect. A correlation was observed between the confidence in the model and the mechanism of food effect, whereby models generally showed high confidence in prediction where food effect was related to changes in GI fluid volume, motility, or luminal fluid composition, while food effects related to drug interactions with intestinal microenvironment and/or food-drug/micelle-drug interactions were more difficult to predict with high confidence. This analysis did not include prodrugs and compounds whose absorption is known to be limited by intestinal active transport; however, such compounds are not expected to make up a significant subset of clinical compounds displaying food effect. While the correlation between model confidence and mechanism of food effect was established for 30 compounds in this study, it is only the first step in understanding this correlation. Future work should focus on further strengthening the validity of these conclusions by expanding this analysis to additional compounds.
