
Abstract

In the present study, a total of 35 S. aureus isolates collected from two different geographical locations viz., Germany and Hungary were tested for their methicillin-resistant phenotype which revealed a high incidence of methicillin-resistant S. aureus. The quantitative test for biofilm production revealed that 73.3% of isolates were biofilm producers. The isolates were further characterized using a set of biochemical and genotypic methods such as amplification and analysis of S. aureus species-specific sequence and mecA gene. The 33 mecA positive isolates were then characterized by the amplification of SCCmec and pvl toxin genes. Further, based on the biofilm-forming phenotype, 15 isolates were selected and characterized through PCR–RFLP of coa gene, polymorphism of spa gene and amplification of biofilm-associated genes. The dendrogram prepared from the results of both biochemical and genotypic analyses of the 15 isolates showed that except for the isolates SA G5 and SA H29, the rest of the isolates grouped themselves according to their locations. Thus, the two isolates were selected for further characterization through whole-genome sequencing. Comparative genome analysis revealed that SA G5 and SA H29 have 97.20% ANI values with 2344 gene clusters (core-genome) of which 16 genes were related to antibiotic resistance genes and 57 genes encode virulence factors. The highest numbers of singleton genes were found in SA H29 that encodes proteins for virulence, resistance, mobile elements, and lanthionine biosynthesis. The high-resolution phylogenetic trees generated based on shared proteins and SNPs revealed a clear difference between the two strains and can be useful in distinguishing closely related genomes. The present study demonstrated that the whole-genome sequence analysis technique is required to get a better insight into the MRSA strains which would be helpful in improving diagnostic investigations in real-time to improve patient care.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-020-02387-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Staphylococcus aureus is one of the leading causes in both communities- and nosocomial-acquired infections. It acquires an arsenal of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and virulence factors-encoding genes (VFGs) that are subjected to horizontal gene transfer (HGT) and recombination (Hughes and Friedman 2005; Chan et al. 2011). It can cause a diverse range of infections including chronic skin and soft tissue infections to life-threatening illnesses (Stefani and Varaldo 2003; Yamamoto et al. 2013; Mottola et al. 2016). The genomic plasticity of S. aureus has enabled the emergence of hypervirulent and drug-resistant strains and led to challenging issues in antibiotic therapy. Consequently, the morbidity and mortality rates caused by S. aureus infections have a substantial impact on health concern (Denis 2017). Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) acquired methicillin resistance gene (mecA) which is present within Staphylococcal Chromosomal Cassette mec (SCCmec) (Zhang et al. 2012) and reduced affinity of penicillin and β-lactam antibiotics (Jansen et al. 2006; Mistry et al. 2016). S. aureus anchors epithelial surfaces and produces biofilm (Strandén et al. 2003; Goudarzi et al. 2017). Biofilms act as a barrier against many antibiotics and other stressors and prevent their entry into the cells. Biofilms also defend the bacterial cells from host-immune evasion (Mah and O’Toole 2001; Donlan and Costerton 2002; Le et al. 2018; Vestby et al. 2020). Biofilm is a complex 3D structure of sessile microbial community covered by an exopolysaccharide glycocalyx (Otto 2008; Deka et al. 2019). The biofilm-forming ability depends on several physicals, chemical, and biological factors (Garrett et al. 2008). The biofilm-forming processes of S. aureus are determined by the icaADBC gene cluster, responsible for the synthesis of polysaccharide intracellular adhesin (PIA), and capsular polysaccharide/adhesion (PS/A) (Chaieb et al. 2005; Arciola et al. 2015; Hoang et al. 2019). The PIA is composed of β-1,6-linked N-acetylglucosamine with partially deacetylated residues, a major component of the exopolysaccharide matrix that surrounds bacterial cells in the biofilm (Mack et al. 1996; Vuong et al. 2004). It was reported that the co-existence of icaA and icaD increase N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase activity and slime production (Arciola et al. 2001, 2006). Additionally, S. aureus possesses microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs), such as elastin (ebps), laminin (eno), collagen (cna), fibronectin A and B (fnbA and fnbB), fibrinogen (fib), bone sialoprotein (bbp) and clumping factors A and B (clfA and clfB) and these molecules are present on the bacterial surface to enable adherence to host tissues, thus playing a pivotal role in pathogenesis (Lindsay et al. 2006; Foster et al. 2014; Ghasemian et al. 2015; Dufrêne and Viljoen 2020).

Methods for molecular typing of MRSA that depend on gene-specific polymerase chain reaction such as SCCmec, pvl (Panton-Valentine leukocidin), coa (coagulase), and spa (S. aureus protein A) genes and followed by restriction enzyme digestion (PCR–RFLP) has proven its good discriminatory power (DP) and is used routinely for typing MRSA strains (Faria et al. 2008; Omar et al. 2014; Al-Obaidi et al. 2018; Tenover et al. 2019; Alkharsah et al. 2019). SCCmec typing classifies the MRSA into hospital-associated (HA-MRSA) and community-associated (CA-MRSA) strains (Appelbaum 2007). HA-MRSA isolates carried SCCmec types I to III, but CA-MRSA isolates has a novel, small variant of SCCmec IV and V, but also has the locus for pvl gene (Baba et al. 2002; Shukla et al. 2012). The coagulase enzyme, a virulence factor encoded by the coa gene contains several tandem repeats suitable to generate polymorphic RFLP patterns among different isolates. These molecular typing methods may be helpful in determining the relatedness among geographically diverse MRSA (Singh et al. 2006; Grundmann et al. 2010).

Phenotypic analysis including the antibiotic resistance patterns and molecular typing methods are beneficial for identifying the risk factors associated with MRSA infections which support the establishment of adequate infection control programs (Zhang et al. 2012; Mistry et al. 2016). Epidemiological studies of MRSA apply various molecular typing techniques such as Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis (PFGE), SCCmec, spa genes typing, Multi-Locus Sequence Typing (MLST), and detection of pvl gene as well as PCR–RFLP of coa gene (Zhang et al. 2012; Al-Obaidi et al. 2018). Many of these established techniques are costly and time-consuming, and the discriminatory abilities of these techniques are also different (Du et al. 2011). However, the spa typing method has been considered as a rapid and inexpensive method for genotyping and it provides high discriminating power than other typing methods (Shittu et al. 2011; O’Hara et al. 2016; Goudarzi et al. 2017; Ali et al. 2019; Rezai et al. 2019; Kareem et al. 2020). Both phenotypic and molecular typing methods have been used widely to detect and differentiate several MRSA strains, but these techniques have certain limitations in infection control and investigating the nosocomial transmission as these techniques provide low resolution and more time-consuming. Because of that in recent times whole genome-based typing has been used as it offers an excellent resolution in global and local epidemiological investigations of pathogen outbreaks and offers further data mining activities essentially for ARGs and VFGs profiling (Köser et al. 2012). So, the Next Generation Sequencer (NGS) based-genome sequencing technique has become a vital tool in the clinical microbiology arenas for comparative genomic analysis of several other species of the Staphylococcus genus in terms of the niche adaptation, combat antibiotics, and emergence of new virulent strains in real-time (Al-Obaidi et al. 2018; McClure et al. 2018; Tenover et al. 2019; Maljkovic Berry et al. 2019; Raven et al. 2020). In the current study, we performed characterization through molecular typing methods and their integrated polyphasic approach to determine the S. aureus lineage strains. The lineage strains were compared deeply into a genomic level based on Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI), genome distance, orthologue gene/ clusters, and the evolutionary relationship. Further, ARGs and VFGs were characterized to understand their crucial role in pathogenesis and defense. The information on genomic characteristics and comparative genomics of S. aureus will facilitate investigations into the molecular basis of pathogenesis and improve diagnostic investigations of infectious diseases in real-time and improve patient care.



Discussion

In the present study thirty-five European S. aureus clinical isolates were characterized by several different typing methods. The data generated from typing results along with virulence genes detection were evaluated through cluster analysis. Antibiotic susceptibility test and detection of mecA gene result showed 33 (94.28%) strains were MRSA while 2 (5.72%) strains were MSSA. Such a validation process was reported by other researchers (Skov et al. 2006; Kumurya 2015). Among the tested strains, 26 strains (71.43%) were found to be resistant to erythromycin. Prevalence of erythromycin-resistant strains collected from Hungary representing 90.47% in a good agreement with previous data (Szabó et al. 2009). It was also reported that the frequency of erythromycin-resistance during 2010–2015 was 72% in Germany (Walter et al. 2017) and 60% in Greece (Stefanaki et al. 2017). However, in the present study, no vancomycin-resistant strains were found which is supported by the observations of previous studies (Szabó et al. 2009; Chaudhari et al. 2014). Vancomycin kills Gram-positive bacteria by interfering with peptidoglycan synthesis and peptidoglycan assembly (McGuinness et al. 2017). The vancomycin susceptibility can be helpful in the treatment of MRSA infections. The resistance of S. aureus to vancomycin is governed by many factors. Previous studies have shown that point mutation in different regulatory loci associated with cell wall metabolism including two-component regulatory systems (guanylate kinase gene (gmk); walRK, graSR, and vraSR) resulted in vancomycin-resistant S. aureus strains (McAleese et al. 2006; Howden et al. 2008; Cui et al. 2009, 2010; Cameron et al. 2012; Shekarabi et al. 2017). In addition to cell wall thickening, altered surface protein profile, enhanced capsule, and agr gene dysfunction are also found to be the cause of the generation of vancomycin-resistant S. aureus. The presence of the vanA operon is also found to confer vancomycin-resistant (Périchon and Courvalin 2009; McGuinness et al. 2017). Also, it was observed that vancomycin-susceptibility in MRSA due to the activation of the WalRK two-component regulatory system (Cameron et al. 2016). The stains of the present study may neither have these mutations or cell wall-related modifications nor do they carry the genes required for vancomycin resistance and thus showed susceptible phenotype. However, a detailed study will be required to confirm the presence or absence of these factors.

Some of the MRSA strains produce PVL, encoded by two genes, lukS-PV, and lukF-PV which have been shown to play a role in the pathogenicity of S. aureus by provoking necrosis, accelerating apoptosis and destruction of polymorphonuclear and mononuclear-cells, thereby contributing to morbidity and mortality (Lina et al. 1999). It was reported that the low prevalence of pvl has found 5% and 4.9% in MRSA strains isolated from France and the UK respectively (Holmes et al. 2005). In the present study, 24.24% (8/33) strains were found positive to the pvl gene. Among these strains, three carried SCCmec type IV and one classified as SCCmec type V, however, four strains carried SCCmec II (Table 2). According to previous reports, MRSA strains belong to SCCmec types I, II, and III are dominant among the HA-MRSA, while SCCmec types IV and V characteristic of CA-MRSA (Monecke et al. 2011; Chua et al. 2014). In the present study, we found that SCCmec type II prevalence (12.12%) was higher in comparison with other SCCmec types. It was also reported that SCCmec type II usually presents in multidrug-resistant MRSA strains (Ito et al. 2001; Hiramatsu et al. 2001) and were dominant outside European countries (Kilic et al. 2006; Makgotlho et al. 2009; de Oliveira et al. 2015). Our data related to SCCmec type IV showed a higher prevalence (27.6%). The reason behind this observation is probably due to the easy acquisition of short size SCCmec type IV cassette (Robinson and Enright 2004). Even though the representation of non-typeable SCCmec in our case complies with the previous finding (Makgotlho et al. 2009), a few non-typeable SCCmec can be reduced by applying the new SCCmec cassette detection (Kaya et al. 2018). Some of the MRSA strains harbored SCCmec IVa showed signs of pvl gene negative (Table 2), which is similar to the finding, reported earlier (Moroney et al. 2007). Our data related to pvl gene detection revealed that MRSA strains harboring SCCmec IVb and SCCmec IVd were found negative. Our finding also supports the idea that the harboring bacteriophage pvl gene by MRSA strains may not be a promising marker for CA-MRSA (Rossney et al. 2007). This conclusion is supported by other studies about SCCmec typing for the classification of HA-MRSA and CA-MRSA (Monecke et al. 2011; Chua et al. 2014). Taken together, our finding suggested that the SCCmec typing method is more informative in problem-solving approaches (control and prevent infections caused by MRSA strains) for the clinicians and epidemiologists.

S. aureus secretes the coagulase enzyme, a polypeptide that helps promote the clotting of plasma or blood (Cheng et al. 2010). The coa gene shows heterogenicity in the 81 base-pair long tandem repeats region differing in number and location of restriction sites among the S. aureus isolates (Goh et al. 1992; Schwarzkopf and Karch 1994). The assay based on PCR amplification of the coa gene followed by RFLP was used to differentiate among the geographically diverse MRSA strains. This technique is simple, rapid, specific, inexpensive, and reproducible; allowing early recognition of an epidemic strain in a hospital setting (Martineau et al. 1996; Hookey et al. 1998; Shopsin et al. 2000; Mahmoudi et al. 2017). In this study, coa-PCR typing yielded seven different amplicons in size range from 550 to 800 bp. Among 15 S. aureus strains, the highest occurrence size is 700 bp (33.33%) as shown in Table 4, however, it was earlier reported that 600 bp amplicon is the most predominant (Mahmoudi et al. 2017). Discrimination of coa gene-specific amplicon pattern was further improved by HaeIII restriction enzyme digestion, which yielded 11 types of patterns with DI of 0.9619. Our data were in good agreement with the previous result in which DI was improved by digestion (Janwithayanuchit et al. 2006). S. aureus produces protein A, an antiphagocytic protein that is coded by the spa gene (Shakeri et al. 2010). The analysis of spa-sequence revealed high diversity, however, two strains belonged to spa-type t008, and another two were classified to spa-type t062 (Supplementary Table 3). In a previous study conducted on German, S. aureus isolates reported that t003 and t008 were predominant spa types (Strommenger et al. 2008). Also, a recently published article stated that t008 was the most prevalent spa type in Europe and America (Asadollahi et al. 2018). The spa-PCR typing method produced eleven different genotypes with variable amplicons size ranges from 335 to 560 bp and revealed 0.9429 DI, which provides similar DI with coa-HaeIII RFLP method which is supported by a previous study (Omar et al. 2014). This study suggested that spa-typing has performed better than other molecular typing methods and showed better DP. This typing method is useful for studying the genetic diversity of S. aureus for the epidemiological tracking of the source of infections (Koreen et al. 2004) and offering several advantages in comparison with alternatives methods, such as a publicly available comprehensive and curated database for analyzing spa sequence with standard nomenclature (Strommenger et al. 2008).

In a good agreement with previous data, we found that not all ica-positive isolates produce biofilms (Møretrø et al. 2003; Fitzpatrick et al. 2005), however, the clinical origin of the used S. aureus isolates was supported by the presence of icaADBC and icaR, indicating the ability to discriminate between the normal floras and virulence strains representatives (Galdbart et al. 2000). In this study, we observed that 66% of the isolates harbor two fnb genes almost similar to the results reported by Peacock et al. for European S. aureus strains. However, the presence of fnb genes in an isolate does not guarantee the biofilm-forming ability of the isolate.

In this study, the cna gene was found to be present in 53.3% isolates. Earlier, the prevalence of the cna gene was reported in a range from 22 to 56.5% (Peacock et al. 1999; Rohde et al. 2007; Zmantar et al. 2008), The clfA, clfB, and epbs genes play an initial role for biofilm development (Ghasemian et al. 2015), however, our data showed that the presence or absence of these genes does not represent a clear discriminative marker for differentiating strains in terms of biofilm-forming ability.

The grouping of the isolates based on the results of coa-HaeIII-RFLP and spa gene sequences produced different groups with different strains. Therefore, the results of all the biochemical and genotypic tests were used to prepare a dendrogram followed by PCA analysis. The dendrogram generated from the combined data of phenotypic and genotypic methods showed that the strain SA G5 and SA H29 collected from different geographical regions clustered together in the same group (Fig. 1b). Similar results were also obtained from the PCA analysis (Fig. 1c). To gain a better idea about their genetic background and closeness between the two strains, both strains were subjected to whole-genome sequencing and analysis. Comparative genome analysis of these two strains revealed 97.03% OrthoANI identity with a genetic distance of 0.0308, sharing 2344 gene clusters. The genes for virulence, resistance, plasmids, pathogenicity islands, prophage-like elements, and mobile elements are encoded by singleton genes of the SA H29 genome, suggesting that these singleton genes might be inherited through horizontal gene transfer (HGT) events (Lindsay 2014). Besides, the genes (5 genes) encoding lanthionine biosynthesis proteins were also found as singleton genes in the SA H29 genome. The presence of such genes influences the niche adaptation, pathogenesis, and contributes to evolution (Hacker and Carniel 2001). The map revealed a small gap with colorless region against the reference genome, which is due to the change in GC % content, this change in GC % content is due to the acquisition of gene through HGT (Hayek 2013) and the GC skewed regions indicated the regions where HGT occurred.

The 16S rRNA gene sequence-based phylogenetic analysis has been used widely to study the evolutionary relationships of microbes (Janda and Abbott 2002, 2007; Goswami et al. 2017). The phylogenetic tree generated using 16S rRNA gene sequences of the two isolates viz., SA G5, and SA H29 also clustered them in the same group whereas the other publicly available isolates were found in other groups (Fig. 5a) supporting the observations of the dendrogram and PCA analysis. However, the other two phylogenetic trees generated based on the SNP and core protein-coding gene sequences grouped the strain SA G5 and SA H29 in different groups. This indicated that these novel approaches of phylogenetic analysis using core protein-coding gene sequences and SNPs (Fig. 5b, c) are more powerful than the16S rRNA gene sequence-based phylogeny and are generally acceptable to distinguish the genomes even in the genus or species level, higher strain-level resolution. It has been reported that 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis is not powerful enough to discern clearly among the closely related species (Fox et al. 1992). Overall, the results of the present study indicate that whole-genome sequence analysis is more powerful than the individual genotypic test and provide better insight into the taxonomic and genotypic background of the test isolates.
