
Abstract

The study investigates the ability of methanolic extract of Andrographis paniculata (MAP) to supplement polyvalent anti-snake venom (ASV) in inhibiting neurotoxic enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and ‘spreading factor’ hyaluronidase from Naja naja (N.N) venom. AChE and hyaluronidase activity were measured in 100 or 200 µg of crude venom, respectively, and designated as ‘control’. In Test Group I, enzyme assays were performed immediately after the addition of ASV/MAP/ASV + MAP to the venom. Inhibition of AChE by ASV (100–367 µg) was 12–17%, and of hyaluronidase (22–660 µg) was 33–41%. Under the same conditions, MAP (100–400 µg) inhibited AChE and hyaluronidase to the extent of 17–33% and 17–52%, respectively. When ASV (220 µg) and MAP (100–200 µg) were added together, AChE and hyaluronidase were inhibited to a greater extent from 39–63 to 36–44%, than when either of them was used alone. In Test Group 2, the venom was incubated with ASV/MAP/ASV + MAP for 10–30 min at 37 °C prior to the assay which enhanced AChE inhibition by 6%, 82% and 18% respectively, when compared to Test Group I. Though there was no change in inhibition of hyaluronidase in the presence of ASV, MAP could further increase the extent of inhibition by 27% and ASV + MAP upto 4%. In Test Group III, venom and substrate were incubated for 90 min and hyaluronidase activity was measured after the addition of inhibitors. Here, ASV + MAP caused increased inhibition by 69% compared to ASV alone. The study confirms the ability of phytochemicals in MAP to contribute to a multipronged strategy by supplementing, thereby augmenting the efficacy of ASV.



Introduction

The World Health Organization (WHO) regards snake bite as a neglected tropical disease (Félix-Silva et al. 2017). According to official figures, India accounts for the highest number of snake bite deaths in the world numbering more than 50 thousand a year ((Mohapatra et al. 2011; Williams et al. 2019). The unofficial number is estimated to be three times more, since most of the deaths in rural areas go unreported (Gupta and Peshin 2012). In India, most venomous bites are attributed to the ‘big four’, i.e., Bungarus caeruleus (common krait), Daboia russelii (Russell’s viper), Naja naja (Indian spectacled cobra) and Echis carinatus (saw scaled viper) (Gupta and Peshin 2012).

The venom of Naja naja (N.N) is known to contain as many as 81 different toxins (Choudhury et al. 2017) and has systemic effects all over the body (SAM et al. 2009; Kumar et al. 2010; Dissanayake et al. 2018; Berling and Isbister 2015; Ahmed et al. 2008). Neurotoxicity, which is a cardinal feature of envenomation, initially manifests as ptosis of the eyes, progressively spreading to other muscles, finally causing respiratory paralysis and death. Peripheral neurotoxicity of the venom has been attributed to three different toxins. The first, a curare-like peptide also called alpha-neurotoxin, with 60–62 amino acids and molecular weight of 6–7 KDa, binds to the post-synaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the neuromuscular junction (Barber et al. 2013). This prevents the binding of acetylcholine (ACh) to the neuromuscular junction, blocking neurotransmission. The second, phospholipase A2, attacks the lecithin in all membranes including those of the neurons (Paoli et al. 2009; Urs et al. 2014) and subcellular organelles causing irreversible destruction of cells. The third, acetylcholinesterase (AChE), blocks neuromuscular transmission by destroying ACh in the synaptic cleft. (Ranawaka et al. 2013). It is well established that elapid venoms including different species of Naja contain high amounts of AChE, with molecular weight of 67 ± 2 KDa (Raivo Raba et al. 1979) and resemble the human AChE in catalytic activity. It occurs as a nonamphiphilic monomer and hydrolyzes acetylthiocholine faster than propionylthiocholine and butyrylthiocholine (Frobert et al. 1997). Blocking venom AChE would enhance the availability of ACh in the neuromuscular junction and relieve paralysis. Neostigmine used in the treatment of snake bite works on a similar principle (Anil et al. 2010; Naphade and Shetti, 1977; Lee et al. 2004).

The ‘spreading factor’ hyaluronidase (molecular weight—70.4KDa), present in N.N venom (Kemparaju and Girish 2006), allows the spread of venom toxins by digesting hyaluronic acid in the extracellular matrix (ECM) (Urs et al. 2014; Girish et al. 2004). This increases the binding of toxins to target tissues and is one of the factors indirectly causing deleterious local and systemic effects (Kemparaju and Girish 2006). When N.N venom was injected into mice followed by the administration of purified hyaluronidase inhibitors, the survival time was prolonged (Girish and Kemparaju, 2006). So, an antitoxin which can neutralize hyaluronidase would minimize local and systemic toxicity and ensure a better outcome in N.N bite victims.

At present, in India, envenomation by N.N is treated with a polyvalent anti-snake venom (ASV), which contains antibodies against the venom of the ‘big four’ snake species, as mentioned above. ASV in India is only partially purified, expensive and its use is associated with a multitude of allergic reactions. It can also trigger anaphylaxis leading to death (Chube et al. 2016; de Silva et al. 2016). Higher doses of ASV have been correlated to greater risks of anaphylactic reactions (Chube et al. 2016). It is well known that ASV cannot neutralize bound toxins (Sarin et al. 2017; Chube et al. 2016; Bawaskar and Bawaskar 2015). Also, systemically administered ASV is less efficient in penetrating into the bite site (Girish and Kemparaju 2005; Rucavado et al. 2004). Thus, while the ASV does save lives, mitigating the local effects of the venom to ensure the rescue of affected tissues requires an alternative strategy of supplementation of ASV with a suitable antitoxin.

Andrographis paniculata (A.P), also called ‘King of bitters’, is a herb which has been used by traditional healers in the treatment of snake bite all over South Asia, including India (Gopi et al. 2011; Samy et al. 2008). In vitro studies with the methanolic extract of A.P (MAP) has been reported to inhibit N.N venom AChE and hyaluronidase (Sivakumar and Manikandan 2015; Gopi et al. 2011). However, in these in vitro studies with MAP, venom and MAP were pre-incubated in an effort to inhibit the enzymes of interest, after which the residual enzyme activity was reported as percent inhibition. These experiments cannot be extrapolated to a real-life scenario, where the snake bite occurs first, following which ASV (containing the putative inhibitors) is administered. When ethanolic extract of A.P was administered intraperitoneally to envenomed mice, a significant increase in mean survival time was observed, but death could not be prevented (Premendran et al. 2011). To justify the use of plant-derived antitoxins and their comparison with ASV, a modified methodology was adopted in a thromboelastographic study of hemostatic abnormalities caused by N.N venom, in which the venom was allowed to act on the blood first, following which the ASV or MAP or their combination was added. These studies measured clotting in real time and proved the ability of the MAP as a supplement to ASV in completely normalizing hemostatic abnormalities caused by N.N venom (Nayak et al. 2020). The present in vitro study conforms to the same modified methodology, focusing on AChE and hyaluronidase, to explore how the MAP stacks up against the standard treatment for N.N bite, i.e., ASV. It also evaluates whether the supplementation with MAP has a better outcome in the presence of lower concentrations of ASV.



Discussion

India, being a large country, has a very wide geographical distribution of the N.N. species and the composition of the venom in different parts of the country varies (Shashidharamurthy et al. 2002). The fact that the commercially available antivenom showed poor inhibition of AChE activity reflects a poor match between the venom and ASV and raises questions regarding its efficacy. It is also possible that the venom used in the manufacture of ASV was poorly immunogenic with respect to AChE and hence the titer of antiacetylcholinesterase was low in ASV (Williams et al. 2019, 2011; Shabbir et al. 2014; Chotwiwatthanakun et al. 2001). This may be the reason why the ptosis which is observed in victims of Naja bite does not always respond to ASV and has to be treated with neostigmine, an AChE inhibitor (Lee et al. 2004). Increasing the concentration of ASV three times did not significantly (p < 0.05) change AChE inhibition. This may be explained by the Marrack’s lattice hypothesis, whereby excess antibodies do not improve antigen–antibody reaction (Matumoto 1948). In toto, the results once again underline the importance of setting up regional ASV manufacturing centers using local snake venoms for developing more effective ASVs, to address the local needs of the community. This approach has also been suggested by other studies (De Silva et al. 2016; Williams et al. 2019; Brown and Landon 2010). However, based on the present study, a more effective alternative approach of supplementing ASV with a suitable plant extract such as MAP would result in a better outcome in addressing neurotoxicity (Williams et al. 2019).

In contrast to ASV, phytochemicals from MAP completely neutralized AChE on incubation with N.N venom. The mechanism of action of MAP on AChE does not depend on antigen–antibody reactions as in the case of ASV. It may be attributed to the presence of several organic compounds such as flavonoids, terpenoids, glycosides and polyphenols in MAP (Suganthy et al. 2009; Adewusi et al. 2010; Mukherjee et al. 2007; Roseiro et al. 2012). If the human body is considered as an incubator which works at 37 °C (as used in these experiments), administration of MAP to an N.N bite victim would provide significant inhibition of AChE to mitigate neurotoxicity. When the substrate was mixed with venom and immediately followed by the addition of both ASV and MAP, the inhibition of AChE was better than when either was used alone. This demonstrates a supplementary effect between ASV and MAP in inhibiting AChE. The inhibitory effect is not additive, most probably because the phytochemicals in MAP with very large ring structures have to maneuver themselves and compete with the antibodies to bind to the enzyme.

Inhibition of hyaluronidase by ASV was only partial (41%) and it was stable for a short period of 30 min. Loss of inhibitory activity on prolonged incubation for 90 min suggests a weak interaction between the enzyme and its antibody. This may also be due to the firm binding of hyaluronidase to the substrate, making it less accessible for inhibition by the ASV. This situation represents the condition when an envenomed patient is brought to the hospital an hour-and-a-half after snake bite. The decreased inhibition of hyaluronidase by ASV (as demonstrated in Test group 3 experiments) on prolonged incubation would cause significant loss of extracellular matrix, enabling the spreading of the venom and decreasing the clinical utility of ASV.

The inhibition of hyaluronidase with MAP was quantitatively better (52% in Test group 1) than with ASV. It was also swift and stable for a prolonged period of 90 min and thus, its action was superior to that of ASV. This is probably because MAP constituents such as flavonoids can compete for the substrate-binding sites of hyaluronidase, unlike ASV which binds only to the antigenic epitopes, to form stable complexes inhibiting the enzyme (Girish and Kemparaju 2005). As in the case of AChE, the combination of ASV and MAP on hyaluronidase activity, though not additive, was better than when either was used alone. It was stable and clearly demonstrated the supplementary effect of MAP with ASV. Prolonged incubation of venom with the substrate for 90 min (Test group 3, Table), followed by the addition of ASV + MAP, did not show significant difference compared to when MAP was used alone. This could be due to the competition causing steric hindrance between the phytochemicals in MAP and the antibodies in ASV to bind to the enzyme. However, the inhibition of hyaluronidase by the combination of ASV (25 µl) + MAP (400 µg), as seen in Test group 3, was 69% higher than when ASV was used alone. This proves that MAP can work as a supplement to ASV when the concentration of the latter is drastically reduced by 92.5%.
