
Abstract

The presence of different excipient types/brands in solid oral dosage forms may affect product performance and drug bioavailability. Understanding the biopharmaceutical implications of superdisintegrant variability (changes in material properties), variation (changes in excipient amount) and interchangeability (use of different excipient types with the same intended functionality) in oral drug performance would be beneficial for the development of robust final dosage forms. The current study investigated the impact of superdisintegrants (sodium starch glycolate, croscarmellose sodium, crospovidone) on the apparent solubility of drugs with different physicochemical properties (drug ionisation, drug lipophilicity, drug aqueous solubility). Compendial and biorelevant media were used to assess the impact of gastrointestinal conditions on the effects of excipient on drug apparent solubility. For the majority of compounds, changes in drug apparent solubility were not observed in superdisintegrant presence, apart from the cases of highly ionised compounds (significant decrease in drug solubility) and/or compounds that aggregate/precipitate in solution (significant increase in drug solubility). Excipient variability did not greatly affect the impact of excipients on drug apparent solubility. The use of multivariate data analysis identified the biopharmaceutical factors affecting excipient performance. The construction of roadmaps revealed that superdisintegrants may be of low risk for the impact of excipients on oral drug performance based on drug solubility alone; superdisintegrants activity could still be a risk for oral bioavailability due to their effects on tablet disintegration.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0406-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Introduction of the Quality by Design (QbD) initiative in pharmaceutical development requires the scientific understanding of the components and processes affecting final product qualities. The critical role of excipients in product performance and oral bioavailability is highlighted as presence of excipients in oral formulations may affect the biopharmaceutical profile of drugs with potential implications on drug absorption. Excipient variability or variation and the use of different excipients with the same intended functionality may further complicate the impact of excipients on oral drug bioavailability. The heterogeneous composition in the different regions of the gastrointestinal tract may as well modify the properties and functionality of excipients and presents an additional challenge to assess the impact of excipients on product performance.

Superdisintegrants are commonly used in immediate release formulations as they promote fast tablet disintegration and improve drug dissolution. Sodium starch glycolate (SSG), croscarmellose sodium (CCS) and crospovidone (CPV) are three commonly used crosslinked superdisintegrants due to their ability to adsorb water and/or swell in low concentrations (typically 2–8% for SSG, 0.5–5% for CCS and 2–5% w/w for CPV in tablet formulations). SSG (Supplementary Fig. 1a) and CCS (Supplementary Fig. 1b) are sodium salts and their ionisation state differs between acidic (neutral form) and basic (ionised form) conditions, while CPV is a non-ionic polymer (Supplementary Fig. 1c). Swelling and shape recovery are the main suggested mechanisms by which superdisintegrants induce tablet disintegration. Swelling refers to the volumetric expansion of excipient particles due to water adsorption while shape recovery refers to excipient deformation upon contact with water. Real-time magnetic resonance imaging identified that SSG and CCS act through swelling while CPV acts through shape recovery. The limited knowledge on superdisintegrant molecular structure, interplay with other pharmaceutical components and performance in the gastrointestinal conditions is challenging for manufacturers. Superdisintegrant interchangeability could be questioned without appropriate identification of the biopharmaceutical consequences of their use.

Molecular properties (composition), particle properties (specific surface area, particle size distribution (PSD)) and level have been identified as the critical material attributes affecting excipient performance (for CPV, molecular properties were not critical). For SSG and CCS, the degree of substitution and degree of crosslinking are critical functional properties. The degree of substitution (presence of the carboxymethyl group) increases polymer hydrophilicity and swelling. The degree of crosslinking reduces the excipient soluble content which can increase the viscosity of the surrounding medium and compromise tablet disintegration. PSD affects the swelling capacity of SSG and CCS, as larger particles swell more extensively compared to smaller particles. For CPV which exhibits a more porous structure, PSD relates to water uptake as the higher porosity of larger particles results in faster water adsorption and tablet disintegration. Finally, increasing excipient level in tablet formulations leads to faster water uptake and tablet disintegration, but care should be taken when using gelling superdisintegrants as high excipient levels may result in the formation of viscous layers around drug particles.

Beyond the intended superdisintegrant use (facilitation of dosage form disintegration), the biopharmaceutical implications of superdisintegrants on drug solubility, drug permeability or drug–excipient interactions are not fully understood. The pH of the medium affects the performance of SSG and CCS due to the ionisation pattern of the excipients. The swelling ability of the neutral form is reduced due to its low hydration capacity compared to the ionised form. The performance of superdisintegrants can also relate to drug physicochemical properties. Electrostatic interactions between cationic drugs and the carboxyl group of SSG and CCS are known to affect the percentage of drug recovery during routine drug analysis or delay drug release from tablet formulations. Drug–excipient interactions are affected by the presence of salts, as high salt concentrations suppress the binding of drugs in the hydrogels. Adsorption of lipophilic molecules to CPV through hydrophobic interactions has been reported that could also affect drug release from pharmaceutical formulations.

The aim of this study was to investigate the biopharmaceutical implications and criticality of superdisintegrant variability and variation on drug apparent solubility. The impact of excipient variability on drug apparent solubility was studied by selecting three SSG brands of different viscosity type and two CCS and CPV brands of different PSD. Two excipient levels (low, 2% w/w; high, 5% w/w) were used to assess the impact of excipient variation on drug apparent solubility. The biopharmaceutical implications of superdisintegrant variability were evaluated by choosing compounds with different physicochemical properties (drug ionisation, drug lipophilicity, drug aqueous solubility) and media (compendial and biorelevant) representing the gastric and intestinal compartments. The significance of drug properties, excipient presence and medium characteristics on the effects of superdisintegrants on drug apparent solubility were investigated with the use of multivariate data analysis (partial least squares (PLS)) and the design of roadmaps.

Materials

APIs: Sulfamethoxazole (SMX) and paracetamol (PRC) were obtained from Fisher Scientific (UK). Furosemide (FRS), itraconazole (ITZ) and dipyridamole (DPL) were obtained from VWR (UK). Ibuprofen (IBU), carbamazepine (CBZ) and metformin (MTF) were obtained from Fagron (UK). Excipients: Glycolys LV and Glycolys (Roquette, France), Explotab CLV (JRS Pharma, USA), Kollidon CL-F and Kollidon CL (BASF-SE, Germany), AcDiSol (FMC, USA) and Primellose (DFE Pharma, Germany) were obtained from the specified sources. Chemicals: Acetic acid (>99.7%), hydrochloric acid 36.5–38%, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade methanol, HPLC-grade acetonitrile, dichloromethane and pepsin (from porcine) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (UK). Maleic acid, sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, potassium phosphate monobasic, sodium dihydrogen orthophosphate dihydrate, disodium hydrogen orthophosphate dihydrate, potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate, anhydrous sodium sulfate and HPLC-grade trifluoroacetic acid were obtained from Fisher Scientific (UK). Sodium taurocholate (Prodotti Chimici Alimentari S.P.A., Italy) and egg lecithin–Lipoid EPCS (Lipoid GmbH, Germany) were obtained from the sources specified. Water was ultra-pure (Milli-Q) laboratory grade. Filters: Whatman® 13 mm cellulose nitrate filters 0.45 μm pore size and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 13 mm filter 0.45 μm pore size were purchased from Fisher Scientific (UK).

Instrumentation

Fisherbrand waterbath (Fisher Scientific, UK), Sartorius BP 210 D balance (Sartorius Ltd., UK), Buchi R114 Rotavapor (Buchi, Switzerland), Mettler Toledo SevenCompact S210 pH meter (Mettler Toledo, Switzerland), Vortex-Genie 2 vortex mixer (Scientific Industries Inc., USA), Brookfield HA-RVIII viscometer (Brookfield Ametek, USA), Agilent Technologies 1100 series HPLC system (quaternary pump (G1311A), autosampler (G1313A), thermostated column compartment (G1316A), diode array detector (G1329A)) and Chemstation software (Agilent Technologies, USA).


