
Abstract

Item response theory (IRT) was used to characterize the time course of lower urinary tract symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH-LUTS) measured by item-level International Prostate Symptom Scores (IPSS). The Fisher information content of IPSS items was determined and the power to detect a drug effect using the IRT approach was examined. Data from 403 patients with moderate-to-severe BPH-LUTS in a placebo-controlled phase II trial studying the effect of degarelix over 6 months were used for modeling. Three pharmacometric models were developed: a model for total IPSS, a unidimensional IRT model, and a bidimensional IRT model, the latter separating voiding and storage items. The population-level time course of BPH-LUTS in all models was described by initial improvement followed by worsening. In the unidimensional IRT model, the combined information content of IPSS voiding items represented 72% of the total information content, indicating that the voiding subscore may be more sensitive to changes in BPH-LUTS compared with the storage subscore. The pharmacometric models showed considerably higher power to detect a drug effect compared with a cross-sectional and while-on-treatment analysis of covariance, respectively. Compared with the sample size required to detect a drug effect at 80% power with the total IPSS model, a reduction of 5.9% and 11.7% was obtained with the unidimensional and bidimensional IPSS IRT model, respectively. Pharmacometric IRT analysis of the IPSS within BPH-LUTS may increase the precision and efficiency of treatment effect assessment, albeit to a more limited extent compared with applications in other therapeutic areas.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00500-w) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in the aging male and is estimated to affect 50% of males by age 60 years and 90% by age 85 years. The clinical manifestations of BPH are known as lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and are characterized by an increased: sensation of incomplete emptying of the bladder following urination, urination frequency, urination intermittency, urgency to urinate, weakness of the urinary stream, straining to start urination, and nocturia. LUTS are associated with adverse health effects such as significantly diminished quality of life and depression, as well as impairment in activities of daily living (3–5). In approximately 10% of patients, the condition may lead to severe complications such as acute urinary retention, urosepsis, and kidney failure. The severity of BPH-LUTS is commonly measured by the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) (also known as the American Urological Association score), which consists of seven questions describing the severity of each of the clinical manifestations of LUTS. The IPSS questionnaire is considered the gold standard measure for assessing BPH-LUTS, and its use is widespread in the clinic, as a primary or secondary endpoint in clinical trials, and in urology research.

Pairwise cross-sectional testing based on the summary score mean change from baseline is the traditional pre-specified analysis for clinical trials using scale measures as the primary efficacy endpoint. However, analysis of clinical trial data through longitudinal pharmacometric modeling has been shown to increase the power to detect a drug effect compared with pairwise testing (9–11). Furthermore, an extension of longitudinal pharmacometric modeling specific to multiple-item questionnaire data, which utilizes concepts derived from item response theory (IRT), has identified the potential for increased assessment precision in several therapeutic areas (namely, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, and depression) (9,12–14). Moreover, the methodology has shown an increase in the power to detect a drug effect compared with longitudinal pharmacometric analysis of summary score data. Briefly, IRT quantifies the relationship between an individual’s intrinsic trait (e.g., disability) and the probability of answering a questionnaire (e.g., IPSS) in a particular way. By preserving the information contained within responses to individual items, it is possible to estimate an individual’s latent disability, how well items discriminate between individuals with differing estimates of latent disability, and the location of item responses along the disability scale.

The GnRH receptor antagonist, degarelix, approved for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer (Firmagon®), was investigated as an alternative medical approach for the treatment of moderate-to-severe BPH-LUTS in patients without prostate cancer. Due to its depot formation upon administration, functioning as a slow-release formulation, treatment with degarelix was envisioned to achieve greater compliance and effectiveness compared with currently approved treatments requiring daily administration. The degarelix doses tested within BPH-LUTS were substantially lower than the approved doses used for treating prostate cancer (a loading dose of 240 mg followed by maintenance doses of 80 mg) to avoid eliciting prolonged testosterone suppression in patients.

To date, only one publication describes longitudinal model–based analysis of the total IPSS and, moreover, longitudinal pharmacometric IRT modeling has not been applied to the analysis of the IPSS within BPH-LUTS. Using data from 403 patients in a phase II trial investigating the treatment of moderate-to-severe BPH-LUTS with degarelix over 6 months, we set out to (i) characterize the internal characteristics of the IPSS through IRT analysis of the item-level data, (ii) utilize the obtained IRT information to develop pharmacometric IRT models describing the time course of underlying BPH-LUTS, and (iii) examine the power to detect a drug effect of pharmacometric IRT IPSS modeling compared with cross-sectional testing and longitudinal modeling, respectively, based on total IPSS.



DISCUSSION

Item Response Theory Analysis

The current paper presents the first reported IRT analyses of the IPSS and longitudinal pharmacometric IRT model within BPH-LUTS. Both a unidimensional and a bidimensional IPSS IRT model were developed based on factor analyses, the latter further confirming previous findings.

In the unidimensional IRT model, the vast majority of the total information content was contained in IPSS voiding items and this finding is supported by a principal component analysis showing total IPSS being predicted by improvement in voiding symptoms rather than storage symptoms. Subscore analysis, i.e., distinguishing treatment effects on the IPSS voiding and storage subscores in addition to the total IPSS, is routinely performed as a secondary statistical analysis of clinical trials within BPH-LUTS, although its clinical meaningfulness has not been established. The current results suggest that the IPSS voiding subscore is more sensitive in assessing a patient’s BPH-LUTS in comparison with the storage subscore and may therefore also be better suited for detecting symptomatic drug effects. It is however to be noted that the most favorable signal-to-noise ratio will be obtained by regarding all available data and acknowledging the information contribution of individual items as opposed to considering the composite (sub)score(s), as exampled by pharmacometric IRT in Parkinson’s disease.

The incomplete emptying item was found to be the most informative. This item has previously been found to be associated with worsening of both voiding and storage symptoms. Incomplete emptying had the highest discrimination parameter value (1.38) in the unidimensional IRT model; however, compared with other reported unidimensional IRT analyses in different therapeutic areas, this is relatively low (e.g., the highest discrimination parameter value was 3.35 in the ADAS-cog IRT analysis and 3.5 in the EDSS IRT analysis). This may indicate that BPH-LUTS is a diffuse and heterogeneous disease, and consequently, IPSS items have difficulty in discriminating between different levels of disability.

The nocturia item was found to be the least informative, and several reports in the literature support this. Firstly, the item may not be sufficiently specific to BPH-LUTS; the primary cause of adult nocturnal polyuria has been attributed to the decline in nocturnal secretion of antidiuretic hormone due to aging as opposed to being a direct consequence of BPH. The nocturia item was also the least specific in Japanese men with BPH and a similar explanation was proposed. Secondly, nocturia may be unspecific to urologic conditions in general. Significant correlation between IPSS nocturia and items 5 and 6 describing nocturia in the 8-item overactive bladder questionnaire (OAB-8) has been established; an IRT analysis of the OAB-8 in both men and women showed the two items describing nocturia to have the relatively lowest discrimination parameter values (ratio to the highest discrimination parameter estimate was 0.35, 0.40, and 0.42 for IPSS nocturia, OAB-8 item 5, and OAB-8 item 6, respectively). It should be emphasized that nocturia and urgency symptoms appear to be the most bothersome symptoms to patients suffering from LUTS. Lower information content does not entail that the corresponding symptom is not bothersome from a patient perspective; it indicates that the frequency of observed scores varies less across patients with highly different disease severity compared with other items. The item is therefore less sensitive in assessing the overall condition and less useful for distinguishing between patients. The bother of each BPH-LUTS symptom is expected to vary between patients, yet this is not captured by the IPSS; this diagnostic limitation is addressed by other questionnaires, e.g., the Danish Prostate Symptom Score and the International Continence Society Questionnaire Male LUTS questionnaire.

Based on comparison between IRT disability and total IPSS, the MDD of IPSS ≤ − 3 for classifying patients as experiencing clinically significant improvement and IPSS ≥ 4 for determining clinical progression of BPH-LUTS (37–40) is supported. However, seeing that there is extensive overlap between changes in latent disability at the observed MDD and below it (decreases lower than three total IPSS points and to a certain extent increases in total IPSS), using only the change in total IPSS to evaluate response may overlook many patients that benefit from treatment. The same reasoning applies to patients that experience worsening of their symptoms.

Discussion regarding the developed sampling-based GAM smooth methodology for evaluating ICCs is presented in the Supplemental Discussion.

Longitudinal Modeling

In both the longitudinal total IPSS and IRT models, a model describing treatment as present or absent best described treatment effect although three different drug doses (10 mg, 20 mg, and 30 mg) were included in the analyzed trial. Lack of observed dose-response and exposure-response relationships may be explained by the narrow dose range studied in the current trial. Including at least four active doses spanning an at least 10-fold range has previously been emphasized to characterize dose-exposure-response adequately. In the current trial, the width of the dose range was restricted due to the expectation of an increase in the incidence of prolonged testosterone suppression at higher doses of degarelix. Further discussion regarding longitudinal modeling and covariate analysis results are presented in the Supplemental Discussion.

The longitudinal bidimensional IRT model allowed for estimation of a differential drug effect on voiding and storage IPSS symptoms, while preserving item-level information. This approach may be more in line with the different effects of therapy on the primary pathophysiologies behind voiding and storage symptoms. Limitations of the pharmacometric bidimensional model included lack of longitudinal parameter precision estimates and inability to include covariates. This can be attributed to the increased model complexity due to presence of several latent variables, and other longitudinal pharmacometric multidimensional IRT models have reported similar issues. More advanced and computationally intensive methods for assessing parameter uncertainty (e.g., a non-parametric bootstrap) may be used to obtain parameter precision, but were beyond the scope of the current work. Item- and summary-level VPCs were therefore the primary basis for concluding adequate model fit and predictive performance. If longitudinal model stability and covariate identification are of primary interest, the longitudinal unidimensional IRT model may be a better-suited alternative. The unidimensional approach may also be advantageous for more straightforward translation between changes in the summary IPSS and IRT-estimated disability. From a psychometric standpoint, both the unidimensional and bidimensional IPSS IRT approaches are valid.

Power

The longitudinal model-based analyses showed considerably higher power to detect a drug effect compared with the cross-sectional ANCOVA using only data from the visit 3 months post-dose. The higher power of longitudinal pharmacometric modeling compared with cross-sectional testing is not a novel finding and has previously been reported in several other therapeutic areas (9–11), yet comparison with a WOT estimand-based test has to our knowledge not been presented previously. These findings are discussed further in the Supplemental Discussion.

A modest increase in power to detect a drug effect was observed by the use of the unidimensional IRT modeling compared with the total IPSS model, and this finding was unexpected given that other longitudinal IRT applications have shown greater increases in power compared with longitudinal summary score modeling. Studies have shown that the larger the number of items in a questionnaire, the higher the power of IRT, and this may explain the similar power between the summary IPSS model and the unidimensional IRT model in the current study compared with analyses of questionnaires with a higher number of items. Furthermore, the heterogeneity in the item discrimination parameter values has been shown to affect the power of IRT compared with summary score modeling. For instance, for the 8-item Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) in multiple sclerosis, pharmacometric IRT analysis showed a larger power increase compared with summary score modeling than in the current study, which may be explained by the higher variability between discrimination parameter estimates of EDSS items (66% CV) compared with IPSS items (29% CV). In the current work, the bidimensional pharmacometric IRT model was used for simulation of data on which the power to detect a drug effect was estimated for the unidimensional IRT and total IPSS models, respectively. A sensitivity analysis specifying the unidimensional IRT model as the simulation model was performed and confirmed the currently reported power difference between the pharmacometric unidimensional IRT model and the total IPSS model (data not shown).

A higher power to detect a drug effect was observed with the longitudinal bidimensional IRT model compared with the unidimensional IRT model. This may be due to the differences in ICCs and disability scale of the multidimensional model compared with the unidimensional model, which, in turn, give a more precise discernment of the drug effect. Given a questionnaire where multidimensionality is substantiated, we hypothesize that the difference in power to detect a drug effect may increase compared with a unidimensional IRT model as the correlation between latent variables decreases, as this would gradually increase the difference in ICCs and disability scale. This is the first investigation of the impact of IRT dimensionality on the power to detect a drug effect and hence warrants further investigation. For example, the original application of pharmacometric IRT based on the ADAS-cog scale investigated the power of a unidimensional IRT model; based on findings suggesting that the ADAS-cog is multidimensional, it may also be of interest to assess the power of a multidimensional pharmacometric ADAS-cog IRT model.

A limitation of the current as well as previous pharmacometric IRT studies was that simulation model bias was present in the power calculations: the pharmacometric IRT model used for simulation of data was also used to estimate power and may therefore have favored the pharmacometric IRT approaches. Other approaches, such as developing longitudinal ordered categorical models for each item and simulating data from these, were considered. However, it is not clear whether the IPSS ICCs would be preserved or require re-estimation based on simulated data by doing so and whether meaningful comparison with previously reported reductions in sample size would be feasible.

The current findings may serve to more precisely assess patients’ underlying BPH-LUTS by utilizing the available item-level IPSS responses instead of considering only the sum of these scores. Furthermore, they may inform more efficient clinical development of BPH-LUTS treatments, although the gain in power to detect a drug effect was found to be lower compared with previously reported applications with different scales describing different neurological conditions. IRT focuses on quantifying the information of questionnaires in specific patient populations; since the modeled data spanned the entire range of total IPSS (i.e., from the lowest to the highest possible disease severity), the presented results may be extended to the analysis of the IPSS in other clinical trials including similar patients with moderate-to-severe BPH-LUTS, regardless of treatment and its effect size.

5The current study emphasizes the importance of quantifying the increase in power to detect a drug effect with pharmacometric IRT modeling when applied to different measurement scales, as it may differ to a great extent depending on the internal characteristics of the latter. Knowledge regarding the size of the increase in the power to detect a drug effect may be primordial in informing a drug developer’s decision to implement the more complex IRT methodology. For completeness, it is to be noted that pharmacometric modeling of longitudinal data is not the current standard for detecting drug effects in clinical trials. Further research regarding, e.g., its general alignment with traditional statistical analyses, the adequacy of its underlying assumptions, its type I error control, and its pre-specification (65–67), is needed before it may be regarded as the primary analysis method and thereby dictate the sample size of clinical trials.

The IRT methodology may be implemented in all clinical trials where composite scores are used to assess treatment efficacy, i.e., from proof-of-concept phase II to confirmatory phase III trials. However, the shift from using “observed total score” to “underlying disease” as the estimand summary measure may represent a substantial paradigm shift and may therefore require framework developments supervised by regulators. An example could be the development of standardized item banks based on a large number of item-level patient responses from many trials. This would inform precise ICCs and thereby allow for precise and, most importantly, consistent estimation of latent disability across different clinical trials. The merit and practical utility of IRT in increasing the efficiency of clinical development programs appear to already be recognized within the US Food and Drug Administration.
