
Abstract

Quality by design (QbD) is an efficient but challenging approach for the development of biosimilar due to the complex relationship among process, quality, and efficacy. Here, the analytical similarity of adalimumab biosimilar HLX03 to Humira® was successfully established following a QbD quality study. Quality target product profile (QTPP) of HLX03 was first generated according to the public available information and initial characterization of 3 batches of Humira®. The critical quality attributes (CQAs) were then identified through risk assessment according to impact of each quality attribute on efficacy and safety. The anticipated range for each CQA was derived from similarity acceptance range and/or the corresponding regulatory guidelines. Finally, a panel of advanced and orthogonal physicochemical and functional tests and comparison of 6 batches of HLX03 and 10 batches of the reference standard demonstrated high similarity of HLX03 to Humira®, except for slightly lower percentage of high mannosylated glycans (%HM) in HLX03 which had no effect on FcγRIII binding and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity in human peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC). All above demonstrated the feasibility and efficiency of QbD-based similarity assessment of a biosimilar monoclonal antibody (mAb).





Discussion

QbD has become an integral part of therapeutic protein development to obtain high and constant product quality with less risk of batch failures. However, effective implementation of QbD is still a challenge in the biopharmaceutical industries due to complex relationships among quality, efficacy, and process procedures. Here, the similarity assessment of adalimumab biosimilar HLX03 to CN-Humira® demonstrated an example of QbD-based analytical similarity study for biosimilar development.

QbD quality study information was conveyed as a story from QTPP, CQAs, to similarity assessment, and acceptance criteria for each CQA. Although there is no definitive request of QbD information from the regulatory agencies, sequential description of QTPP, quality study, CQA, and similarity assessment would be helpful to give the review staff a clear picture of the product. In this study, publicly available information of Humira® and the RP characterization data were first collected to generate the QTPP list of adalimumab biosimilar HLX03. The quality attributes were then thoroughly analyzed using the qualified or verified analytical methods. Since antibodies are a homologous class of molecules, knowledge gained from prior experience or published studies may greatly aid in identification of CQAs. The nature of TNFα, patient population, indications, and effector functions were all considered in the risk assessment. The identified CQAs were closely investigated using multiple orthogonal and advanced analytical methods. Based on the risk ranking, quality attributes were assigned to corresponding tiers of 1 to 3 for similarity assessment.

Physicochemical and functional tests demonstrated high similarity of HLX03 to CN-Humira®, except for slightly lower %HM in HLX03. As previously reported, %HM affects Fc-related bioactivities and half-life of mAbs. Since Fc-related bioactivities have little contribution to the clinical effect on target indications of HLX03, and the %HM difference between HLX03 and the RP was not expected to affect clearance of mAb, HM was identified as a none-CQA for HLX03. Batch to batch %HM variations are existed in the RPs as well. According to the data released by AbbVie, the %HM (M5 + M6) ranged from 5 to 8% in the RP batches produced from 2001 to 2013. Meanwhile, the %HM ranged from 6.8 to 9.7% in the EU and US sourced Humira® recorded in an Amgen’s biosimilar paper. HM enhances ADCC activity via FcγRIII binding. In the most sensitive ADCC experiment system incorporating FcγRIIIa over-expressed effector cells to the tmTNF-α over-expressed target cells, lower ADCC activity was observed for HLX03. In consistent with a previous study, the FcγRIII affinity and ADCC activity increase with the increased %HM in the in vitro study using recombinant proteins or engineering cell lines. While HLX03 showed similar ADCC to the RP in the experiment using PBMC as effector cells to simulate the in vivo condition. The extracellular region of tmTNF-α can be quickly hydrolyzed to soluble TNF-α in vivo, leading to a shortage of tmTNF-α in human cells. Further experiments showed that neither HLX03 nor the RP could initiate ADCC activities in the experimental system without using the engineering cell line as the target cell. The ADCC was reported to have no effect on efficiency and safety of the antibody in RA, PA, and Ps treatments. Certolizumab pegol, a humanized F(ab’) IgG1 fragment against the TNFα with no ADCC and CDC activities, has consistent efficiency and safety in RA with other TNFα inhibitors. The ADCC activities in NK92-CD16a cells of US and EU licensed infliximab (another TNFα inhibitor) were changed along with corresponding afucose plus HM content ranged from 5.6–12.8%, but the ADCC activities were similar for all the products in PBMC. All above demonstrated that the %HM difference between HLX03 and the RP would not affect the similarity of ADCC effect in clinical trials. HM can affect the half-life of the mAbs through binding with mannose receptors. However, the % HM from 4 to 17% only resulted in 1.0 to 6.0% differences on the area under curve (AUC) in Goetze AM’s study. Accordingly, the %HM differences between HLX03 and the RP might have no significant effect on half-life. Furthermore, HLX03 demonstrated pharmacokinetics equivalence and comparable safety with the RP in the phase I clinical trial. Preclinical and phase III clinical data also provided similar evidences for similarity of HLX03 to the RP (data unpublished). All above confirmed that the %HM difference did not impact clinical similarity of HLX03 to CN-Humira®. Based on the observations, it can be expected that, other than RA, PA, and Ps, HLX03 will still be demonstrated equivalence to the RP in clinical trial of inflammatory bowel diseases, for which ADCC may has potential functions and would be assigned as tier 2 quality attribute for similarity assessment.
