




Discussion

The aim of the current study was to understand the difference between fill density percent set in Slic3r vs. the fill density percent measured in the actual part. The printing process was highly repeatable as seen from the consistency in weights between samples printed at the same fill density percent values in Tables 1 and 2. During extruder calibration, the overlap between adjacent beads generated within Slic3r is necessary to fill all the void spaces between the oblong shaped cross-section of beads and create a true 100% dense construct. With an overlap of 0.043 mm the center-center distance between beads became 0.4–0.043 = 0.357 mm. Slic3r extrudes plastic during this 0.357 mm travel from current bead to the next bead as well and that is why the measured weight is larger than 2.520 g, which is the estimated weight for a fully dense 20 mm × 20 mm × 5 mm model printed at 100% fill density. Because the predicted weight calculation includes the bead-to-bead interconnecting extrusions in the calculation, it can be seen that it is much closer to the measured weight (0.2% average error) than the fully dense weight (1.1% average error). The low error between predicted and measured weight helped verify extruder calibration as well as establish confidence in the predictive model for weight.

For samples printed at 9.58%, 20.36%, 32.33% as well as at 15% and 40% the weights were also consistent across samples at each Slic3r fill density percent as seen in Table 2, which demonstrates good repeatability in printing. The XYZ dimensions were quite close to the original design with the most deviation observed along the Z. This likely occurred because of the relatively large gaps (0.493 mm to 3.327 mm) between adjacent beads relative to EW that could have caused the extrusions in subsequent layers to slightly sag. As expected, the changes in weights did not correlate one to one with the changes in the Slic3r fill density percent. For instance, the average measured weight of the constructs printed at 100% Slic3r fill density was 2.554 g, whereas the average measured weight at 9.58% was 0.322 g. Similarly, it can be seen that the average of the sample weights at 20.36% Slic3r fill density was 1.87 times the average of the sample weights at 9.58%, whereas the ratio of the respective Slic3r fill density percent values was 2.13.

At low fill densities it was observed that the error between slicing fill density percent and measured fill density percent was substantially high (> 25%), but the predicted fill density percent was able explain the measured fill densities to well within 5% error. This difference was primarily due to the extruded material between extrusions (the center to center distance between adjacent beads or interconnects) being ignored in the slicer calculations (Table 4). This error becomes significant at low infill density since the gap distance between adjacent beads increases, and therefore the amount of material extruded in the bead-to-bead interconnects increases as a relative portion of the total material extruded. The average error in Table 3 reduces from more than 26.1% at 9.58% Slic3r fill density to an average error of 6.6% at 40.00% Slic3r fill density, which shows the rapidly decreasing proportion of the material extruded in the bead-to-bead interconnects compared to the total material extruded (Table 4).

In addition to the three identified Slic3r Fill Densities of 9.58%, 20.36% and 32.33%, the predicted fill density percent was in close agreement with measured fill density percent at 15% and 40% Slic3r fill density as well thus demonstrating applicability of the methodology laid out to other arbitrarily low fill density values. To the author’s knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the relationship between measured and slicing fill density using the open source slicer Slic3r. Several studies have reported data regarding measured porosity percent (100 – measured fill density percent) and some have tried to predict porosity and compare it against the measured porosity. Too et al. modeled porosity in terms of the EW, LH, n, Gap and part size and observed good agreement between measured and predicted porosity for porosities under 70% which correspond to fill densities over 30% . However, they assumed a rectangular cross-section of the beads and also did not compare their results with the fill density percent set in the software since they were using a closed source software. Woodfield et al. modeled porosity in terms of n, bead diameter, number of layers and part size and found reasonable agreement between measured and predicted porosity in the 55–88% range, but their measured porosity was in most cases 7–8% lower than that predicted . This was likely the case because they did not consider the material extruded in the bead-to-bead interconnects in their model, and they also assumed the bead to have a perfect circular cross-section. However, they too did not compare the measured and predicted porosities against the slicing fill density/porosity. Zein et al. modeled porosity in terms of n, bead diameter and the number of layers but found the predicted values to deviate significantly (> 10%) in many instances in either direction when compared to the measured porosity . The reason for this was likely because they assumed a cylindrical cross-section for the beads and ignored the bead-to-bead interconnects, but they also did not compare the measurements against the sliced fill density. Armillotta et al. modeled porosity using a unit cell approach in terms of the bead thickness and Gap assuming a square cross section for beads, but found significant deviation compared to measured values which they attributed to measurement inaccuracies . Shor et al. modeled the porosity in terms of the gap, bead diameter and sine of the bead angle, but did not report any measured porosities for their samples . Hattiangadi et al. modeled the porosity in terms of EW, LH and Gap assuming an elliptical cross-section for the beads, but found substantial differences compared to experimental measurements which they attributed to micro porosity in their structures .

The approach laid out in the current study allows researchers to predict the actual fill density to a reasonable degree of accuracy, particularly in low fill density (high porosity) scenarios, based on slicing parameters EW, LH and fill density percent set in the open source slicer Slic3r. Being able to accurately predict the fill density before actually printing the part is quite beneficial, and could also allow researchers to adjust slicing parameters for achieving a target fill density in the part. For instance, one potential method to achieve a target fill density in the construct would be to estimate density using the predicted fill density percent model and then reduce the extrusion multiplier in the slicer to achieve the desired density. As mentioned earlier, this is vital in biomedical applications since the porosity (100 – measured fill density percent) is such a crucial parameter affecting the diffusion of nutrients into and the removal of waste out of printed constructs in vitro and in vivo, which consequently affects the growth and proliferation of cells seeded within the construct. Researchers have also found strong correlation of porosity with the compressive strength of constructs, so being able to accurately predict porosity (from accurate prediction of fill density) could result in more accurate mechanical properties.

This study has some limitations. First, the predictive model for fill density percent in its current form is only applicable to cuboidal parts, since otherwise the bead-to-bead interconnects might end up being curves or other geometries based on the contour shape for that layer. Next, the study assumes a fixed oblong cross-sectional shape for extruded beads, but the actual deposition process is complex and there are certainly deviations from this shape based on the slicing parameters, underlying substrate, direction of nozzle travel etc. Furthermore, the difference in error between predicted fill density percent vs. measured fill density percent and Slic3r fill density percent vs. measured fill density percent becomes more and more insignificant at higher fill densities, since the material extruded in the bead-to-bead interconnects becomes smaller relative to the total material extruded. Moreover, the methodology laid out is best applicable to relatively small sized constructs since the contribution from material extruded in the bead-to-bead interconnects in inversely proportional to the square of bead lengths as seen in the second term of the right hand side in Eq. 5. Finally, the model and findings are presently only applicable to the 0/90-degree fill pattern.
