




Discussion

To master US-guided CNB, a radiologist must fluidly move the biopsy device accurately through the breast, while imaging the target with the contralateral hand. Hands-on training with breast phantoms is necessary to hone these skills. Several commercial ultrasound training phantoms exist, but are costly and have limited reusability.

3D printed breast models have been used to in preoperative planning, simulation of multiple surgical techniques, and as phantoms for assessing imaging parameters for both MRI and x-ray based mammography [13–15, 22–26]. Conceptually, 3D printed models are also feasible for US-guided procedural training, provided the printed material is adequate for proprioceptive simulation of real human tissue and image production.

The need for printable soft tissue density material has been well addressed. New materials including TangoPlus, and more recently Tissue Matrix, provide a realistic tissue feel. However, the sonographic image quality of these materials is not well studied. The ultrasound beam was unable to penetrate all three of the printed breast model materials including VeroClear, TangoPlus, and Tissue Matrix. Various US imaging parameters were utilized to optimize the image, including a gel standoff pad, without success in producing a diagnostic quality image. The reasoning for poor image quality may be multifold and is not completely understood. The printing process likely results in deposition of air between the resin layers, which makes sound waves impenetrable. Among the 3D printed materials, Tissue Matrix came the nearest to realistic breast soft tissue simulation. The remaining materials were too hard for a needle to penetrate, making them poor models for CNB training.

At our institution, a chicken breast phantom with implanted pimento olives has been the most realistic teaching tool. Sonographic visualization of soft tissues and simulated breast lesions was excellent. The chicken breast reasonably simulated the proprioceptive characteristics of human breast biopsy. However, several drawbacks of this method still exist. Foremost, the chicken breast method suffers from environmental unfriendliness and risks contamination of imaging equipment. For this reason, biopsy instruments used on the chicken model are often disposed of after each session, leading to additional waste and increased cost.

US phantoms created from Knox brand gelatin provide an alternative avenue for low-cost biopsy training. Several authors have used this product for breast as well as other US-guided procedural training . Similar to chicken breast, the sonographic image quality of gelatin models adequately simulates human soft tissue. However, limitations exist with the gelatin-based phantom. Gelatin is particularly fragile and the density too soft compared to human breast tissue. Small cracks created in the gelatin during routine handling, multiple biopsies, or excessive pressure from the probe can create pockets of air within the model and obstruct visualization of targets. The short shelf life of the gelatin and creation of air tracks with each biopsy limits reusability. Preservatives may be added to extend shelf life; however, the single use nature of gelatin models makes preservatives unnecessary.

Limitations of this study include the lack of additional types of printing technologies or materials, including flexible materials printed with the use of material extrusion, vat photopolymerization, and other types of material jetting printers (i.e. 3D Systems and Mimaki).
