
Abstract

To analyze the intestinal microbiota diversity of several important economic fishes in the Loudi area and its correlation with the microbiota of water environment, the high-throughput sequencing based on the bacteria 16S rRNA was used to analyze the intestinal microbiota diversity in fish intestines and water. The results revealed that half of the OTUs in the water sample could be detected in the fish intestine, the proportion of shared OTUs in the intestines of Hypophthalmichthys molitrix and water samples was only 22%, and the unique OTU in the LC group was relatively the highest in the fish intestinal group. It can be seen from the analysis in NMDS analysis, the distance between Hypophthalmichthys molitrix group and water group is relatively farthest. Ctenopharyngodon idellus has the highest microbiota richness and diversity (P < 0.05), while the water samples have the lowest microbiota richness (P < 0.05). Firmicutes, Methylocaldum and Bacillus are the prevalent taxonomic unit in the Aristichthys nobilis and Carassius auratus groups, Anaerospora is the prevalent genera in the Hypophthalmichthys molitrix group, Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria have a high relative abundance ratio in the Ctenopharyngodon idellus group, and the prevalent taxonomic unit in the water sample group are Phenylobacterium, Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria. In conclusion, fish species have different prevalent microbiota. There are a strong correlation between fish intestinal microbiota and the water environment, and the fish with a weak correlation is Hypophthalmichthys molitrix. Results of this study will contribute to the prevention and treatment of fish diseases and the fish ecological culturing in Loudi area.



Introduction

The intestinal microbiota of fish are much more simpler than mammals (Mitra et al. 2014; Okadinya et al. 2013). Similarly, due to the limitations of fish physiological conditions, in which the evolution of the intestine of fish is not complete, the digestive enzymes secreted by intestinal microorganisms and the regulating functions of intestinal microorganisms on fish immunity are particularly important. Intestinal physiological microbiota, fish body and the surrounding water environment constitute a ecosystem, which is interdependent and mutually restricted. The balance of this system is the key factor to maintain the health of fish.

The gut microbiota of fish is affected by a variety of factors. Among these, the main factors are the type of fish and the waters it inhabits, while other factors include the bait, development stage, water temperature and physiological conditions (Jiang et al. 2016). At present, there have been many reports on the microbiota composition of freshwater fish. Different from the mammalian intestinal microbiota, which are mainly dominated by bifidobacteria and lactobacillus, the prevalent intestinal microbiota of fish has exhibited huge differences, and even the intestinal prevalent microbiota of the same fish differs in different regions (Nilsson et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2015). Therefore, the study of fish intestinal microorganisms should be systematic or qualitatively researched in fixed culturing conditions.

Pond intensive aquaculture has a short cycle and high yield, which is the main mode of aquaculture in China. However, this model has a high culturing density, and a large amount of bait and medicine are used, which has a great negative impact on disease outbreaks and the surrounding environment (Li et al. 2010). At this stage, the microecosystem comprise of the fish gut, fish body and the surrounding water environment in the Loudi area, which is already very fragile. Therefore, it is necessary to study the gut microbiota of fish in different environmental conditions. The present study aims to analyze the intestinal bacterial diversity of several important economic fishes in the Loudi area and their correlation with the bacterial structure of the water environment, to provide basic data for the prevention and treatment of fish diseases, the use of microbial additives, and the fish ecological culturing in this area.


