
Abstract

Botroclot is a marketed preparation containing hemocoagulase, which is an enzyme having coagulant activity, isolated from the snake Botrops atrox. This formulation is used in dental surgeries and other minor surgical wounds. However, the formulation remains untested in diabetic wounds. Hence, we proposed a study for the topical application of Botroclot in high-fat diet (HFD) + Streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats. HFD was fed initially to rats which facilitates the development of insulin resistance. Thereafter, an injection of STZ (40 mg/kg, i.p.) was given. This resulted in the development of diabetes with elevated fasting glucose and impaired glucose tolerance. After stabilization of blood glucose values, wounds were created by punch biopsy on the dorsal side of the palm of the rat to mimic the diabetic wounds frequently seen in the case of humans. Later, the application of Botroclot on these wounds was carried out for 15 days. Topical application of hemocoagulase improved the wound closure and there was a gradual decrease in inflammatory markers and a substantial increase in collagen deposition occurred. Histopathological findings indicated the same, with an increase in granulation tissue suggesting that the topical application moderately improves the wound healing in diabetic rats. We conclude that Botroclot can have a mild to moderate effect in improving collagen deposition and thus wound contraction, improving wound closure in diabetic wounds in rats. This study also establishes the basis for exploration of agents from venom-based sources in diabetic wound healing.



Introduction

Diabetic wounds are a common issue seen with patients. As compared to wound healing in healthy individuals, healing of the wound is delayed in case of diabetic patients. Physiologically the reason is due to impaired blood flow, diabetic neuropathy and impaired immune function. Whereas at a molecular level, the impaired cytokine production, impaired fibroblast and other cell migration and chronic inflammation are associated with the delay in wound healing (Patel et al. 2019). Diabetic wound healing and diabetic ulcers remain an unaddressed area with no agents other than Becaplermin (Steed 1995) available to hasten the healing of wounds, however even this agent has now been withdrawn due to the risk of cancer at the site of application as well as at distant sites (EMA 2012). Diabetic wounds are afflicted by increased infection, inflammation and delayed or insufficient collagen deposition that delays wound healing (Fahey et al. 1991). Plant-derived product is an avenue that has been tried for all kinds of wounds and conditions, whereas natural products of animal origin is an area that is still in its infancy. Venoms are a mixture of compounds from animal sources used for defence and hunting prey which can be investigated for the purpose of wound healing (Estevão-Costa et al. 2018), with bee venom being one agent that has been previously investigated for this purpose (Badr et al. 2016).

Botroclot is a marketed topical solution containing sterile hemocoagulase solution 0.2 CU, isolated from Bothrops atrox or Bothrops jararaca venom along with chlorhexidine (0.1%v/v). Hemocoagulase is an enzyme usually found in venoms of hemotoxic snakes that catalyse the coagulation of blood. Its activity is associated with a molecule called Batroxobin (BTX) (Madhu et al. 2019). Over the years, many components of animal venom have been investigated for their potential use for a variety of diseases and disorders. Amongst these BTX is one such component that has been successfully tested and marketed for use as a topical coagulant for minor (dental) and major surgeries (Chowta et al. 2014; Madhu et al. 2019).

Hemocoagulase works by causing cleavage of fibrinogen into fibrin monomers which eventually leads to the formation of fibrin polymers (Chowta et al. 2014). The nature of BTX is characteristically different from that of thrombin and so are their resulting clots. BTX shows activity systemically as well as at the local site of application in the absence of important clotting factors. Thrombin is inactivated in the presence of antithrombin, which is not seen with BTX.

BTX has been shown to promote wound healing in dental surgeries (Vandana Shenoy et al. 2015), by improving collagen deposition, reducing inflammation and infection. In wounds of primary intention, BTX allows for a good seal between the edges and reduces scarring. In this paper, we investigate the role of Botroclot on diabetic wound healing in HFD-STZ diabetic rats an area in which this agent has not been tried for.

In streptozotocin-induced diabetic models, it has been observed that delayed wound healing is due to the impaired inflammatory phase. In this study, we have focused on the effect of Botroclot on various wound markers to investigate its potential for diabetic wounds.

Materials

Streptozotocin (STZ) (MP Biomedicals India Pvt. Ltd., Navi Mumbai, India), Normal saline, ketamine and xylazine were purchased from a local pharmacy. Acrylamide, BCA protein assay kit and lysis buffer were procured from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Illinois, USA. Formalin and sodium citrate used were of analytical grade. Non-fatty blocking grade milk ( Bio-Rad Laboratories, California, USA) bovine serum albumin (HiMedia Laboratories, Mumbai, India), antibodies (Elabscience Inc., Wuhan, China), enhanced chemiluminescent (ECL) reagent ( Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Illinois, USA) were also procured.



Discussion

Botroclot in this study showed beneficial effects in hastening wound healing in diabetic rats as observed with shrinkage of the wound. Wound shrinkage occurs when there is migration of fibroblasts to the epithelial tissue that attaches into the matrix. The fibroblasts enter into the wound tissue and pull together the wound allowing for sealing/closure of the wound (Ehrlich and Hunt 2012; Brauer et al. 2019). This phenomenon helps restore the mechanical strength within the wound region. This process can only occur after or with the deposition of extracellular matrix in the form of collagen (Aravindan Rangaraj et al. 2011; Brauer et al. 2019). The deposition of ECM and collagen allows for the tissue cells to develop attachments and undergo modification and thus become permanent residents in the healing wound region. Through western blot and histopathological examination, we confirmed the promotion of collagen deposition and early granulation at the wound site. Type I and Type III are the major forms of collagen found in the skin (Clore et al. 1979). During healing, type III is initially deposited in the wound which is eventually converted into type I. Collagen deposition allows for keratinocyte and fibroblast migration (Guo et al. 1990; Aravindan Rangaraj et al. 2011; Lü et al. 2013; Jiang et al. 2016). It is for this reason that externally applied collagen provides an alternative form of the wound dressing. However, Botroclot provides a benefit here as it can be applied directly to a freshly formed wound and may prevent the conversion of the acute wound to a chronic wound, the collagen too is naturally generated at the wound and eliminates the external application of collagen. This observation is backed by histopathological examination of the tissue which has indicated the presence of granulation along with regeneration in wounds treated with Botroclot whereas, disease control wounds showed no deposition of granulation tissue but rather only mild regeneration indicating delayed healing.

The expression of pro-inflammatory marker IL-6 was found to be increasing towards day 15 which is similar to that of the normal healing process as seen from the western blot analysis. Even though Botroclot treated wounds healed faster, some amount of ulcerative tissue was seen in the case of both disease control and treated wounds in histopathological studies. In the case of diabetic wounds, inflammation is exacerbated which hinders the natural process of healing (Zhao et al. 2016). In diabetic rats, IL-6 is low in the early phase of wound healing, Botroclot does not cause a further reduction in this phase. Inflammatory markers tend to be elevated in the wound, attracting and allowing entry of immune cells. This, in turn, helps to clear debris and invading pathogens from the wound site only after which tissue repair can occur. Simultaneously, cytokines are released to counterbalance this effect (Acosta et al. 2008). If the inflammation does not subside, the wound gets converted into a non-healing wound. This is manifested in a diabetic wound where the counterbalance is not achieved. Non-healing wound needs to be debrided and ulcerative tissue to be excised to allow normal healing by secondary intention. Our findings suggest that Botroclot can provide some benefit in case of diabetic wound by improved deposition of collagen and thus wound closure, besides from the obvious early clot formation but not by reduction of inflammation.

The wound was measured only in two dimensions, measurement of paw volume can be a better tool for measuring healing in a three-dimensional manner.

We conclude that Botroclot can improve the rate of diabetic wound healing, as well as cause a reduction in the inflammation of wounds. It improves collagen deposition and shrinkage of the wound, thus causing faster closure as compared to non-treated wound closely simulating a normal non-diabetic wound in rats.

The effect of Botroclot in the reduction of infection and bacterial load on the wound, owing to the clotting property of the enzyme was not studied since it was beyond the scope of this study. Due to improved clot formation, the clot can provide a barrier to the entry of microbes. This can further improve healing.
