
Abstract

Rauvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex Kurz., popularly known as Indian Snakeroot plant, belonging to Apocynaceae family, holds immense medicinal importance, owing to its rich source of multiple secondary metabolites such as ajmaline, ajmalicine, reserpine, and serpentine. To meet the constant demands for the key secondary metabolite (reserpine) by majority of the pharmaceutical industries, the present study assessed the effects of direct and indirect regeneration system on amelioration of reserpine accumulation in shoots of R. serpentina. In vitro multiple shoot cultures were established using shoot tip explants. Best results for shoot initiation, multiplication, and biomass production were obtained in case of Murashige and Skoog medium, supplemented with 1 mg/l N6-benzyladenine. The multiple shoots were then sub-cultured on cytokinin–auxin combination media for further proliferation. Highest shoot and leaf multiplication rates and the most enhanced biomass were obtained in case of 1–1.5 mg/l Kinetin + 0.2 mg/l α-naphthalene acetic acid (NAA). Callus induction and its subsequent proliferation was obtained using 1.5 mg/l 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. The best indirect shoot regeneration with highest shoot and leaf proliferation from calli was observed in case of 1 mg/l thidiazuron + 0.2 mg/l NAA. Reserpine content estimation via HPTLC from in vitro shoots (direct regeneration) and calli (indirect regeneration) were recorded to undergo an almost three-fold and two-fold increment (respectively) in comparison to that of the mother plant. Thus, in vitro direct regeneration system proved to be more effective and efficient in ameliorating the reserpine content.



Introduction

Rauvolfia genus comprises of different species of plants which have diverse medicinal and allied uses. The genus belongs to the family Apocynaceae and order Gentianales, under the kingdom Plantae. These plants are erect, evergreen, perennial shrubs growing up to a height of 60–90 cm (Mukherjee et al. 2019). Amongst different species, Rauvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex Kurz. finds itself to be quite indispensable owing to the presence of assorted secondary metabolites, which have varied medicinal and therapeutic uses. Centre of origin of the plant is South-East Asia. The plant is extensively distributed in the tropical zones of America, Africa, India, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, and Nepal. In India, the distribution covers parts of tropical Himalaya, Gangetic plains, sub-Himalayan territories covering Shimla to Assam, and Sikkim to Nepal and Bhutan. Almost all parts of the plant such as leaves, shoots, flowers, and especially the roots contain several secondary metabolites like ajmaline, ajmalicine, rescinamine, reserpine, serpentine, etc. These compounds are mainly indole alkaloids that are biosynthesised from the aromatic acid tryptophan. Since ancient times, this plant has been utilized in Ayurveda and Unani as remedies for fever, hypertension, insomnia, epilepsy, psychosis, schizophrenia, and other central nervous system disorders (reviewed by Mukherjee et al. 2019). Root extracts have been used as a cure for snakebites and ulcers (Lobay 2015; Bunkar 2017). As per the reports of Soni et al., root bark find its usage as a hypnotic and sedative which aids in lowering down blood pressure.

By and large, this plant is propagated via seeds; stem cuttings and root cuttings have been reported in some cases as well (Ghate et al. 2019). However, these traditional ways of propagation are subject to several limitations, viz., low seed set, poor rooting (Khan et al. 2018), and high occurrences of genetic variation in seed propagated populations (Pillai et al. 2012). Lucrative pharmacological and ethnobotanical uses (due the presence of the above-mentioned secondary metabolites) have led to the exploitation of R. serpentina natural resources, thereby pushing the species to a threatened category as per IUCN. Keeping in view these constraints that are involved with the propagation and conservation of this plant species; in vitro tissue culture technologies offer a practical and constructive solution to the preservation and maintenance of this plant. It is hypothesized that in vitro propagation technology of R. serpentina, following direct and indirect (callus-mediated) regeneration for enhancement of biomass and secondary metabolites production, would be a significant contribution to the pharmacological industry at large, since both biomass-cum-secondary metabolite production would be facilitated simultaneously.

Arrays of reports are available on all these aspects of reserpine production via different in vitro biotechnological interventions, discretely (reviewed by Mukherjee et al. 2019). For instance, there are quite a few reports on the production of reserpine from in vitro plant cell, tissue, and organ cultures using transformed hairy roots (Pandey et al. 2014), elicitor-mediated shoot apex and nodal segments (Panwar and Guru 2015), and germinated synthetic seeds (Gantait and Kundu 2017), etc. However, till date, to the best of our knowledge, the inclusive reports are very limited, since none of them covers all of these aspects on R. serpentina in one singular comprehensive report. Based on this backdrop, the present study deals with the optimization of in vitro direct multiple shoot and indirect (callus-mediated) multiple shoot regeneration system in R. serpentina for high biomass production and eventually to ameliorate the reserpine level among in vitro regenerants.



Discussion

For in vitro multiple shoot initiation in R. serpentina in the present study, BA outperformed the other four cytokinins (namely, KIN, TDZ, zeatin and mT). Presumably, BA is effective in breaking apical dominance, thereby promoting more lateral bud initiation and subsequent growth (also confirmed by Bahuguna et al. 2011). Such result justifies that this type and dose of PGR is optimum for the direct growth and development of meristematic tissues. Initiation and multiplication rates, including biomass enhancement, were much superior in case of BA than the other PGR types and concentrations, which was also established in the reports of Mishra et al., Alatar et al., George et al., and Faisal et al. in Rauvolfia spp. Irrespective of PGR type, lower concentrations exhibited better performance than the higher ones, with the exception of BA. Similar results were published in the reports of Mallick et al. and Zafar et al. wherein it was claimed that shoots were more responsive to higher concentrations of BA during shoot induction. Most likely, a higher dose of BA was effective in shoot initiation and lower concentrations of the same induced better shoot growth and proliferation. In Rauvolfia, across several published reports, it was detected that the effects of zeatin and mT on shoot multiplication were not explored (reviewed by Mukherjee et al. 2019) till date, which has been duly addressed in the present study. It was further noticed that application of BA resulted in enhanced shoot multiplication and higher biomass content, whereas application of KIN resulted in elongation of shoots. Such findings are in homology with the reports of Shivaraj and Rao in eggplant (Solanum melongena L.), wherein the effectiveness of BA (in obtaining higher frequency of shooting) and KIN (in shoot elongation) were highlighted. In most of the published reports related to the direct regeneration (i.e., direct multiple shoot proliferation) in Rauvolfia, the effects of combination media, viz., BA + KIN + IAA or NAA, have been studied. During proliferation of initiated multiple shoots, TDZ in combination of NAA significantly outperformed the other cytokinins (BA or KIN). Such beneficial effects of TDZ on inducing shoot multiplication and elongation were also reported by Alatar. As per the reports of Mondal et al., Alatar et al., Rani et al., and Ahmad et al., it was confirmed that media containing cytokinin + auxin combinations were effective in direct shoot regeneration. However, contrary to their reports, wherein it was claimed that BA + NAA combinations were much more effective in shoot proliferation; the present experiment has revealed, otherwise, that KIN + NAA combinations yielded better results.

Leaf explants chosen for callus induction were subjected to different PGRs, which exhibited differential rates of callus induction and proliferation. Efficiency of leaf explants during induction of callus in R. serpentina was reported by majority of the earlier studies (reviewed by Mukherjee et al. 2019). Calli induced with the application of 2,4-D were organogenic and greenish white. Similar findings were reported by Bahuguna et al., Mallick et al., Rohela et al., and Gantait et al.. On the other hand, BA- or KIN-induced calli were light green and compact to friable in nature. This is in accordance with the results that were reported by Singh et al. and Rohela et al. on R. serpentina. Contrary to our results, whitish calli from BA + IAA were obtained by Rani et al. and friable calli from BA alone were reported by Zafar et al.. In comparison to control, wherein minute callus was observed to have formed from the petiolar end, it could be clearly stated that in PGR-supplemented media, especially auxins like 2,4-D were utilized for inducing friable calli, and cytokinins (BA and KIN) employed for inducing green embryogenic calli, proved to be much more efficient. The above findings are in conformity with the reports of Mallick et al., and Rashmi and Trivedi on R. serpentina, where solely 2,4-D was responsible for callus formation, although the dose of PGR had been higher (2.5 mg/l) than the present report. However, Rashmi and Trivedi further reported the use of BA + 2,4-D combination for callus induction. In the reports of Pandey et al., Bahuguna et al., Panwar et al., Rohela et al., and Zafar et al., it was stated that 1–2 mg/l 2,4-D along NAA or BA or KIN was effective in higher callus inductions. However, Gantait et al. reported the use of a higher dose of 2,4-D (5 mg/l) along with 2 mg/l NAA for callus induction in R. serpentina. Contrary to the present study, Singh et al., Saravanan et al., Rani et al., Kaur, and Pant and Joshi had obtained maximum callus induction using PGRs like BA, KIN, NAA, IBA, and IAA, instead of using 2,4-D.

Interaction between cytokinins and auxins in shoot regeneration from callus cultures was explored in the present study. Shoot regeneration from calli, employing TDZ alone, has also been reported by Pandey et al., although a dose that was as high as 4 mg/l was used. Reports of Rohela et al. also highlighted the use of TDZ (2.27 µM) for successful shoot regeneration. In the same way, Kaur also reported high callus induction using solely BA or KIN. Contrary to the result of the present study, in most of the other reports related to shoot regeneration from calli, BA + NAA combinations were frequently used (Panwar et al. 2011, Mallick et al. 2012, Rashmi and Trivedi 2016). However, Uikey et al. mentioned the usage of three PGRs interventions such as BA, TDZ, and NAA (each at a dose of 0.5 mg/l) for shoot regeneration from embryogenic callus-derived somatic embryos. In some cases, indirect (callus-mediated) shoot regeneration was obtained in the media supplemented with GA3 along with the presence of BA (Singh et al. 2009; Bahuguna et al. 2011; Gantait et al. 2017). However, unlike the present experiment, not a single study (related to callus regeneration in Rauvolfia) reported the use of KIN + NAA and TDZ + NAA combinations, solely (reviewed by Mukherjee et al. 2019). In majority of the reports, KIN was used in combination with BA, NAA, or IAA individually (Rohela et al. 2013; Rani et al. 2014).

Based on the HPTLC analysis of the samples, multiple shoots (via direct regeneration) exhibited higher reserpine content than calli. Possible explanation to this could be that the cells and tissues under direct regeneration have a definite organization, so the cells are oriented towards a defined biological development, which leads to a uniform biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. On the other hand, calli have an unorganized constitution, wherein not all cells might be active and hence are oriented towards a defined development and secondary metabolite production. The obtained result (reserpine content of the mother plant) of the present experiment corresponds with the reports of Panigrahi et al., wherein it was mentioned that in vitro cultured plant parts contain significantly higher secondary metabolites than that of the same ex vitro plant parts. For instance, a lower value of reserpine from ex vitro leaves (13.77 μg) was reported by Panda et al.. Contrary to our results, much higher values of secondary metabolite content were reported in the findings of Panwar and Guru, where the crude alkaloid contents in various parts of in vitro regenerants through HPTLC were quantified. It was mentioned in their report that in vitro leaves yielded 2.35 mg/g reserpine and stem and leaf-derived calli yielded 6.81 mg/g and 8.98 mg/g reserpine, respectively. In addition, the afore-mentioned report stated the richness of reserpine content in de-differentiated calli than well-organized shoot and leaf structures, which differs from the findings of the present study. As per the report of Panwar and Guru, it was stated that in vitro regenerants produced 55.67 mg/g reserpine on dry weight basis. However, such enhancement was obtained only through salicylic acid and tryptamine elicitations. Similar usage of elicitors for reserpine enhancement was reported by Nurcahyani et al., Harisaranraj et al., Zafar et al.; thus, differing from the results of the present experiment, wherein enhancement of the secondary metabolite was affected without the use of any elicitor. There are multiple reports related to reserpine estimation from in vitro shoot or calli or cell suspension culture or synthetic seeds or hairy roots individually (reviewed by Mukherjee et al. 2019). Investigations of Gantait and Kundu reported 249.37 ± 0.21 µg/gm reserpine content from germinated synthetic seeds that were kept under storage at 8 °C, whereas Faisal et al. reported a homogeneity in reserpine levels between the germinated synthetic seeds (that were stored under 4 °C storage) and ex vitro grown mother plant. Nonetheless, the present report is the first one of its kind that provides a comparative analysis of reserpine production between mother plants and regenerants from in vitro cultures, raised via direct (shoot multiplication) and indirect (callus-mediated) pathways.
