
Abstract

The aim of the study was to develop a robust and standardized in vitro dissolution methodology for orally inhaled drug products (OIDPs). An aerosol dose collection (ADC) system was designed to uniformly deposit the whole impactor stage mass (ISM) over a large filter area for dissolution testing. All dissolution tests were performed under sink conditions in a sodium phosphate buffered saline solution containing 0.2%w/w sodium dodecyl sulphate. An adapted USP Apparatus V, Paddle over Disk (POD), was used throughout the study. The dissolution characteristics of the ISM dose of a commercial metered-dose inhaler (MDI) and a range of dry powder inhaler (DPI) formulations containing inhaled corticosteroids were tested. The uniform distribution of the validated ISM dose considerably reduced drug loading effects on the dissolution profiles for both MDI and DPI formulations. The improvement in the robustness and discriminatory capability of the technique enabled characterization of dissolution rate differences between inhaler platforms and between different DPI product strengths containing fluticasone propionate. A good correlation between in vivo mean absorption time and in vitro dissolution half-life was found for a range of the inhaled corticosteroids. The ADC system and the reproducible in vitro POD dissolution measurements provided a quantitative-based approach for measuring the relationship between the influence of device and the dispersion characteristics on the aerosol dissolution of low solubility compounds. The in vitro dissolution method could potentially be applied as a dissolution methodology for compendial, quality control release testing, and during development of both branded orally inhaled drug products and their generic counterparts.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-0422-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

For a locally acting inhaled drug product to elicit a pharmacological effect, the therapeutic dose must first reach the mucosal surface, lining the respiratory tract. Upon reaching the respiratory mucosa, the fate of the inhaled drug substance is not well understood. However, it is believed that the critical determinants that affect the local drug concentration at the sites of action, as well as the rate and extent of drug absorption through the lung, are the deposition pattern (i.e., the distribution of the respirable dose among mouth–throat regions, conducting and peripheral airways), the molecular properties of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) and the need for the drug to be in solution, that is, the in vivo dissolution kinetics.

Currently, since local drug concentrations throughout the respiratory tract cannot be measured in a practical way, determining local equivalence between test and reference products in developing bioequivalent generic products is very challenging and more complicated than for systemically acting drugs. Furthermore, with the limited understanding of the relationship among conventional in vitro performance parameters [e.g., aerodynamic particle size distribution (APSD) profiles, mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD), fine particle dose (FPD), and delivered dose] and the dissolution and absorption kinetics of the respirable dose, the development of bioequivalent orally inhaled drug products (OIDPs) is extremely challenging. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) currently recommend the aggregated weight of evidence approach to establish bioequivalence between test and reference OIDPs. This relies on comparative in vitro studies (for equivalence in product performance) and comparative in vivo studies [pharmacokinetic (PK) for equivalence in systemic exposure and pharmacodynamic (PD) or clinical endpoint (CE) for equivalence in drug delivery at the sites of action] in addition to formulation sameness (Q1 and Q2, i.e., the same inactive ingredients and at the same concentration ± 5% as the reference product) and device similarity. This weight of evidence approach has been used by FDA to draft individual product-specific guidance to assist in the development programs of generic OIDPs.

In the case of generic OIDPs, the identification, validation, and standardization of novel in vitro and in silico tools may provide an insight into the relationship between regional drug deposition and the extent and rate of drug exposure at the local sites of action in the lungs. This may ultimately provide an alternative regulatory pathway for demonstrating bioequivalence of generic OIDPs without the need to conduct in vivo comparative PD or CE studies.

For poorly soluble drugs, the correlation between aqueous solubility and mean absorption time (MAT) for a range of compounds in the lungs suggests that dissolution may be the rate limiting step for absorption. Furthermore, dissolution of the respirable dose in the limited fluid lining the central airways is in kinetic competition with the pulmonary mucociliary clearance mechanism. Thus, the bioavailability of the pulmonary deposited dose, both locally and systemically, may be directly affected by the dissolution characteristics in the air–liquid interface. In silico mechanistic modeling of the systemic exposure of a poorly soluble drug substance, with different aerodynamic particle size distributions, highlighted that the slight difference in deposition pattern could not explain the observed differences in plasma profiles and indicated that the rate of dissolution was the rate limiting step of absorption into the systemic circulation.

The major challenges in developing an in vitro dissolution test for OIDPs have been reviewed by both the USP Ad Hoc Inhalation Advisory Panel in 2008 and the dissolution working group of the IPAC-RS in 2012. They reviewed all published methodologies for aerosol collection and dissolution testing of OIDPs, available at those times. The major findings of both groups were that all methodologies lacked the robustness and the level of validation required for a standardized dissolution test, either as a quality control tool to assess batch consistency or in establishing a quantitative in vitro–in vivo relationship between dissolution data and systemic PK profiles.

The major challenge in the development of a dissolution approach for OIDPs remains the aerosol collection system and the associated apparatus for measuring dissolution of a representative pulmonary dose. May et al. investigated the influence of different dose collection methods, membrane holders, and dissolution media on the dissolution process. The authors highlighted the critical need to collect a homogenous distribution of the aerosolized dose onto a membrane to increase the discriminatory capability of the dissolution measurements. Indeed, one of the drawbacks of commercially available aerosol filter-based collection systems is that the dissolution rate is highly sensitive to the collected dose and decreases with increasing collected mass of a given formulated product. The effect is thought to be due to the formation of in situ agglomerates, created by the impactor jets, during collection onto the filter membrane surface. This results in agglomerates of drug particles that cannot be fully wetted by the dissolution media. Thus, these collection systems can lead to a significant increase in the probability of particle–particle aggregation, which directly influences the sensitivity and discriminatory capability of dissolution rate measurements.

The goal of this study was to develop a bespoke aerosol dose collection (ADC) system together with an adapted USP Apparatus V, Paddle over Disk (POD), which may constitute a significant step toward providing reliable dissolution data to gain a better understanding of the potential relationships among OIDP formulations and local and systemic bioavailability. The major specific, technical objective of the study was to validate the impactor stage mass (ISM) dose collected by the ADC, with respect to the ISM dose collected by the Next Generation Impactor (NGI), and to significantly improve the robustness and discriminatory capability of the in vitro dissolution test through uniform distribution of the aerosolized dose across a high surface area filter. All dissolution tests were undertaken with a selection of commercially available OIDPs containing glucocorticoids, which, with their poor water solubility and negligible oral bioavailability, were selected as suitable candidates for investigation.


