
Abstract

The important physiological and pathophysiological roles of intestinal human microbiome (HMB) in human health have been emerging, owing to the access to molecular biology techniques. Herein we evaluated, for the first time, the intestinal HMB through direct hybridization approach using n-counter flex DX technology which bypasses the amplification procedure currently applied by other technologies to study the human microbiome. To this purpose, a clinical study was carried out on fecal samples, recruiting both healthy volunteers (N-FOB) and subjects positive for occult blood (P-FOB). A relevant custom panel of 79 16S rRNA target gene was engineered and 32 of them displayed a variation between the two clusters of subjects. Our findings revealed that bacteria belonging to Proteobacteria have higher distribution in P-FOB describing dysbiosis. Similarly, Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phylum display high distribution in P-FOB. Of interest, the presence of Clostridium difficile that belongs to Firmicutes phylum displayed about 70% of low presence in N-FOB compared to P-FOB subjects. Only one bacterium belonging to the Actinobacteria phylum, the Bifidobacterium bifidum, was present.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1007/s13205-020-02351-w) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Introduction

Around 10^12 (trillion) complex microbial communities composed of fungi, yeasts, viruses and bacteria reside in the digestive tract, which constitute the human microbiome (HMB) (Marchesi et al. 2016). Its metabolism as well as its genetic set interacts with the host organism defining a close symbiotic relationship (Fischbach and Segre 2016). As a result, the bacterial composition mirrors the sophisticated commensality interplay that is established with the host organism and within the microbial community (Thursby and Juge 2017; Khangwal and Shukla 2019). Intestinal HMB changes with aging and metabolic disorder, and may contribute to the decline of nutrients’ absorption (Dahiya et al. 2017; Kastl et al. 2020). It has been shown that by proper nutritional intervention, HMB can be restored and balanced sustaining eubiosis (Nagpal et al. 2018; Salazar et al. 2017; Wu and Wu 2012). Eubiosis is also re-established by antiviral therapy in persistent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection mouse model (Li et al. 2020). HMB is capable of guaranteeing the well-being of the entire organism and its role is essential for the immune system of the host organism (Wu and Wu 2012; Mu et al. 2016). Environmental factors, poor lifestyles, psycho-physical stress, overnutrition, and pharmacological treatments are able to modify HMB, defining the dysbiosis (Karl et al. 2018). This latter condition is often linked to the lack of intestinal homeostasis which in turn correlates to a wide range of inflammatory conditions (Wen and Duffy 2017). Current knowledge concerning intestinal HMB, using test based on 16S rRNA gene target, points out to the existence of a community of almost 1000 bacterial species classified into five phyla: Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobia (Rajilic-Stojanovic M and de Vos WM, 2014). The results achieved thus far via high-throughput sequencing (HTS) platforms are very interesting, but the workflow, which includes the library preparation protocols and the enzymatic amplification of the nucleic acid, could lead to different results among the HTS platform used (Salipante et al. 2016; D’Amore et al. 2016; Loman et al. 2012; Lam 2011; Quail et al. 2012; Clooney et al. 2016; Mohammadi et al. 2019). Besides that, sample collection and bacterial DNA extraction as well as the 16S rRNA gene target region represent other important points in the assessment of intestinal HMB (Pollock et al. 2018; Rintala et al. 2017). Therefore, concerns about using HMB analysis is still debated, limiting it to routinely clinical practice (Pollock et al. 2018). In this framework, the assessment of the intestinal HMB in the medical setting may be helpful to dissect symptoms such as episodic colitis attack, diarrhea, constipation, flatulence, and intestinal discomfort (Chichlowski and Rudolph 2015; Simrén et al. 2013). Moreover, intestinal HMB analysis can be fundamental to develop therapeutic and personalized nutritional interventions (Seo et al. 2013). In this work, we attempted to overcome these concerns. To minimize experimental variation, fecal samples were collected and stored with OMNI gene GUT, which proved as a reliable and convenient system to study intestinal HMB (Panek et al. 2018). We performed bacterial DNA extraction with automatic system MagCore HF16 Plus with some modification to improve DNA yield; to avoid library preparation, we performed direct hybridization with n-counter flex DX. To evaluate dysbiosis, fecal occult blood (FOB) samples were collected from patients enrolled via a clinical trial. Of note, several inflammatory intestinal disorders are related to FOB which is not strictly related to colon cancer (Walker 1990; Libby et al. 2018). In this scenario, we have designed in July 2017 the first custom panel “CDR_CNV_Bc_miCrobioTA22586” with 79 bacteria 16S rRNA target genes representative of gut health and impaired in gut inflammation status (Tarallo et al. 2019). Alicyclobacillus acidophilus, Rhizobium radiobacter and Salinibacter ruber are not present in the human gut and were used as negative control of human microbiota bacteria 16S rRNA gene. ACTB, GAPDH and HDAC3 genes were used for monitoring human DNA contamination.


