
Abstract

Excipients are major components of oral solid dosage forms, and changes in their critical material attributes (excipient variability) and/or amount (excipient variation) in pharmaceutical formulations may present a challenge for product performance. Understanding the biopharmaceutical factors affecting excipient performance is recommended for the successful implementation of excipient variability on Quality by Design (QbD) approaches. The current study investigated the impact of magnesium stearate (MgSt) variability on the apparent solubility of drugs with a wide range of physicochemical properties (drug ionization, drug lipophilicity, drug aqueous solubility). Compendial and biorelevant media were used to assess the role of gastrointestinal (GI) conditions on the excipient effects on drug apparent solubility. The lipophilic nature of MgSt decreased the apparent solubility of most compounds. The reduction in drug apparent solubility was more pronounced for highly soluble and/or highly ionized drugs and in presence of more highly crystalline or smaller particle size MgSt. The use of multivariate data analysis revealed the critical physicochemical and biopharmaceutical factors and the complex nature of excipient variability on the reduction in drug apparent solubility. The construction of a roadmap combining drug, excipient and medium characteristics allowed the identification of the cases where the presence of excipient or excipient variability may present risks for oral drug performance.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00449-w) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Excipient variability (changes in material properties) and variation (changes in amount) can affect final product quality leading to batch failures, altered bioavailability and bioinequivalence within products . The need for successful implementation of excipient variability in Quality by Design (QbD) approaches is widely recognized. Excipients may present challenges in a biopharmaceutical perspective as their presence may impact drug stability, solubility, permeability and overall product performance . Gastrointestinal factors may affect or be affected by excipient performance in pharmaceutical formulations . Varying the critical material attributes of certain excipients may be problematic for oral drug absorption. Understanding the biopharmaceutical risks of excipient variability would be beneficial towards the development of robust oral solid dosage forms.

Magnesium stearate (MgSt) is a frequently used lubricant in tablet manufacturing due to its excellent properties . Typical excipient levels used in immediate-release formulations range between 0.25–5% w/w . MgSt can compromise drug release, as it acts as water repellent through the formation of a hydrophobic film around drug particles . MgSt may adhere to metal or powder/granule surfaces by its polar Mg2+ while the non-polar fatty acid orients away from the coated surface and is responsible for the negative impact on product performance (Fig. 1a). Formation of mono- or multi-particulate layers around particles by the non-polar head of MgSt has also been suggested as a coating approach for solid dosage forms.Fig. 1a Chemical structure of magnesium Stearate (ChemDraw Professional 15.0). b Relative content (%) and total sum (%) of stearic and palmitic acid. c XRPD patterns. d Particle size distribution and specific surface area. e SEM micrographs of the studied brands of MgSt. The different brands are shown as for (i) MgSt - BDH (black colour), (ii) Ligamed MF-2-V (red colour) and (iii) Ligamed MF-3-V (blue colour)

Fig. 1

a Chemical structure of magnesium Stearate (ChemDraw Professional 15.0). b Relative content (%) and total sum (%) of stearic and palmitic acid. c XRPD patterns. d Particle size distribution and specific surface area. e SEM micrographs of the studied brands of MgSt. The different brands are shown as for (i) MgSt - BDH (black colour), (ii) Ligamed MF-2-V (red colour) and (iii) Ligamed MF-3-V (blue colour)

MgSt is a mixture of stearic and palmitic salts . Several different hydrates and corresponding solid-state forms of MgSt have been identified: anhydrous, monohydrate (needle—shape or disordered), dihydrate (plate—shape), trihydrate (needle—shape) . MgSt samples may comprise of crystalline (single or combination of 2 or more forms) or disordered forms . Molecular, structural, particle properties and excipient level have been identified as potential critical material attributes of MgSt . The purity of MgSt (ratio of stearic and palmitic acid) may affect its lubrication efficiency. The delay in the dissolution of a highly soluble drug (paracetamol, United States Pharmacopeia (USP) 2 apparatus, 0.1 N HCl pH 1, 25 rpm, 37°C) was more pronounced in the presence of commercial MgSt (pharmaceutical grade mixture of stearic and palmitic salts with not less than 40% of stearic acid) compared with high purity MgSt (> 90% of stearic acid) . The slower drug dissolution was attributed to the formation of an extensive hydrophobic layer around particles by commercial compared with high purity MgSt. The formation of the hydrophobic layer around particles by MgSt depends on the solid-state form of the excipient. Disordered MgSt hinders the formation of a smooth film around particles due to its irregular shape . Milling crystalline MgSt breaks its crystal structure leading to less crystalline material which exhibits poor lubrication efficiency . The significance of the degree of crystallinity (CRS) is highlighted as the negative effects of disordered MgSt on lubrication can dominate the lubrication efficiency of the crystalline portion . Coating strength and uniformity depend on the particle size distribution (PSD) of the lubricant. Smaller particles create a thin but homogenous layer due to higher adhesion force on surfaces while larger particles have relatively less tendency to adhere on surfaces creating less uniform coats . A statistical evaluation of the factors affecting the lubrication efficiency of MgSt identified that for crystalline MgSt, moisture content, Hausner ratio, PSD (d50) and specific surface area (SSA) were critical material properties . Finally, the level of excipient in solid dosage forms may affect the coating efficiency of MgSt and its impact on product performance. Pronounced delay in tablet disintegration and drug dissolution when increasing the amount of MgSt on formulations has been reported as a result of decreased tablet wettability .

The biopharmaceutical factors affecting the impact of MgSt on product performance are not fully investigated. The extent to which MgSt delayed drug dissolution was found to depend on the solubility of the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API). Dissolution studies (USP 2 apparatus, 0.1 N HCl pH 1, 75 rpm, 37°C) of capsules containing drugs of different solubility showed that although MgSt presence delayed drug dissolution, the impact was more pronounced for the drug with the lowest solubility in the dissolution medium . The pH of the solution will affect the performance of MgSt due to the ionization pattern of the excipient. The dissolution of metformin hydrochloride (USP 2 apparatus, 50 rpm, 37°C) from tablets containing MgSt was slower in acidic (simulated gastric fluid without pepsin (SGF) pH 1.2) compared with basic conditions (phosphate buffer pH 6.8) . This difference in drug dissolution by MgSt was attributed to the generation of stearic acid in acidic media which causes a more pronounced delay on drug dissolution due to its lower solubility compared with the salt form .

The aim of this study was to identify the impact and criticality of MgSt variability and variation on drug apparent solubility from a biopharmaceutical perspective. MgSt variability and variation were assessed by selecting and characterizing three MgSt brands of different grades and/or suppliers to investigate the role of certain critical material attributes including purity (% of stearic and palmitic acid), CRS (intensity of diffractograms), PSD (d10, d50, d90) and excipient level (low: 2% w/w, high: 5% w/w) on drug apparent solubility. The potential biopharmaceutical implications of MgSt variability and variation on drug apparent solubility were investigated by choosing compounds of varying physicochemical properties (drug ionization, drug lipophilicity, drug aqueous solubility) and media (compendial and biorelevant) representing the gastric and intestinal conditions. The criticality of certain variables (drug properties, excipient presence, medium characteristics) on the impact of MgSt on drug apparent solubility was examined with the use of multivariate data analysis (partial least squares (PLS)) and the construction of roadmaps.

Materials

APIs: sulfamethoxazole (SMX) and paracetamol (PRC) were obtained from Fisher Scientific (UK). Furosemide (FRS), itraconazole (ITZ) and dipyridamole (DPL) were obtained from VWR (UK). Ibuprofen (IBU), carbamazepine (CBZ) and metformin (MTF) were obtained from Fagron (UK). Excipients: MgSt-BDH was obtained from BDH chemical Ltd. (UK). Ligamed MF-2-V and Ligamed MF-3-V were obtained from Peter Greven (Germany). Chemicals: acetic acid (> 99.7%), hydrochloric acid 36.5–38%, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade methanol, HPLC grade acetonitrile, dichloromethane, heptane, pepsin (from porcine) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (UK). Maleic acid, sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, potassium phosphate monobasic, sodium dihydrogen orthophosphate dihydrate, disodium hydrogen orthophosphate dihydrate, potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate, anhydrous sodium sulfate, HPLC grade trifluoroacetic acid, stearic acid > 98% and palmitic acid > 98% were obtained from Fisher Scientific (UK). Boron trifluoride-methanol complex 12% in methanol was obtained from VWR (UK). Sodium taurocholate (Prodotti Chimici Alimentari S.P.A., Italy), egg lecithin-Lipoid EPCS (Lipoid GmbH, Germany), were obtained from the sources specified. Water was ultra-pure (Milli-Q) laboratory grade. Filters: Whatman® 13 mm cellulose nitrate filters 0.45 μm pore size and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 13 mm filter 0.45 μm pore size were purchased from Fisher Scientific (UK).

Instrumentation

Fisherbrand waterbath (Fisher Scientific, UK), Sartorius BP 210 D balance (Sartorius Ltd. UK), Buchi R114 Rotavapor (Buchi, Switzerland), SevenCompact S210 pH meter (Mettler Toledo, Switzerland), Vortex-Genie 2 vortex mixer (Scientific Industries Inc., USA), D8 Advance AXS Bruker Powder diffractometer (Bruker Inc., USA), Agilent Technologies 1100 series HPLC system, (quaternary pump (G1311A), autosampler (G1313A), thermostatted column compartment (G1316A), diode array detector (G1329A), Chemstation software (Agilent Technologies, USA) and Chrompack CP-9003 series GC system coupled with a Varian 4400 integrator (Varian Instruments, USA).


