




Discussion

This paper describes the development of a method to create comprehensive 3D printed patient specific coronary models derived from CCTA. These models give us the ability to replicate the geometry of arteries with submillimeter accuracies while providing means to control distal flow conditions . Using the proposed three chamber outlet system, we can control separately the distal resistance of each coronary tree subsection and adjust within human relevant ranges. The addition of the catheters of varying resistances allowed for simulation of the capillary beds that is not currently possible using 3D printing technology. The resistance of the chamber proved to be negligible, with the chamber resistance equating to 0.65–5.86%, 1.23–6.86%, and 0.05–1.67% of the coronary resistance for the LAD, LCX, and RCA, respectively, at flow rates within typical rest to moderate physical activity. It can be concluded based on these results that the chamber did not add significant distal resistances to the three individual coronary arteries, while serving its purpose as a compliance chamber to each of the LAD, LCX, and RCA trees. This deems importance as catheters of varying sizes were inserted into the benchtop set up to function as structures simulating the specific distal resistance of each coronary artery.

3DP offers a unique opportunity to build flexible vascular models with patient specificity for device testing, treatment planning, clinical resident training and physiological simulations. By optimizing these models both geometrically and hemodynamically, much promise is shown for this tool to improve clinical interventional outcomes as well as allow for a better understanding of coronary artery disease flow complexity. From the CCTA scan to being 3D printed, geometric manipulation is kept at a minimum to allow for highly accurate patient specific models. These phantoms are created to be put into a system that is highly interchangeable in regards to flow rates and pressures and can withstand pressures between 80 and 140 mmHg. To circumvent the inability to image and 3D print fine capillary structures, we developed a system where the effect of such structure on the flow is simulated using adjustable distal resistance. Our system incorporates the distal arterial compliance through the integration of the three chambered structure in which we are able to regulate the change in pressure as a function of volume, determined individually for each of the three main coronary artery’s capillary beds. The distal resistance is simulated through the connection of catheters to the chamber (Fig. 3c) of varying diameters and lengths to account for the specific resistances of the LAD, LCX, and RCA at changing activity states.

There are a few limitations related to the phantom design process. Regarding imaging, the CT imaging accuracy was reduced by the voxel size with the 3DP resolution of 200 μm surpassing the spatial resolution of the CCTA of 630 μm. A limitation of this study is using five CCTA volumes with reduced artifacts from a set of 75. Since most of the coronary arteries are between 4- and 5-mm diameter, a small error in the segmentation can result in significant changes in flow. Thus, only images with reduced motion artifact and calcium burden should be used or advanced imaging techniques which will allow alleviate these limitations. Involving the segmentation process, there may have been some errors in exclusion of hard-to-detect, soft plaque when segmenting the calcification from the vasculature, thus altering the diameter. We cross-validated this process between two users to avoid significant errors . In addition, in the process of small branch and segmentation artifact elimination, we sculpted the mesh within Autodesk Meshmixer manipulating single triangular vertices, which might have created minor geometric alteration. During the process of inlet and outlet extension of the aortic root, we tried to align the cylinder with the mesh so that the outer ridge of the ostium was not affected to allow for normal turbulent flow within the aorta, but minor error possibly occurred during cylinder alignment. Additionally, as most of the distal ends of the arteries are in close proximity to the chamber structure, but not well separated by specific chamber, we added tubing to extend the coronary artery branches to allow optimal separation into the corresponding chamber (e.g. LAD, LCX, RCA). The added tube consisted of one centimeter or less of distal extension. The added segment had one millimeter larger diameter, than the distal tip of the artery to reduce the overall contribution of resistance. Another potential limiting factor is that the elastic material in which the phantoms are printed allows deformations, which may affect the accuracy of benchtop testing done on the models over time.

Other limitations are related to the manipulation of the distal resistance of the coronary arteries. Though the resistance of the three chambered structure proves to be 0.050–6.859% of the coronary resistance, it still adds to the total resistance of the phantom. Therefore, to account for this added resistance, the user should subtract the chamber resistance from the coronary resistance in each of the three main coronary arteries to give the resistance needed distally from the catheters. Also, the catheters used in our models rounded the resistance values recorded from Kim et al. , inducing an error of ~ 2%.
