
Abstract

In recent years, global sensitivity analysis (GSA) has gained interest in physiologically based pharmacokinetics (PBPK) modelling and simulation from pharmaceutical industry, regulatory authorities, and academia. With the case study of an in-house PBPK model for inhaled compounds in rats, the aim of this work is to show how GSA can contribute in PBPK model development and daily use. We identified two types of GSA that differ in the aims and, thus, in the parameter variability: inter-compound and intra-compound GSA. The inter-compound GSA aims to understand which are the parameters that mostly influence the variability of the metrics of interest in the whole space of the drugs’ properties, and thus, it is useful during the model development. On the other hand, the intra-compound GSA aims to highlight how much the uncertainty associated with the parameters of a given drug impacts the uncertainty in the model prediction and so, it is useful during routine PBPK use. In this work, inter-compound GSA highlighted that dissolution- and formulation-related parameters were mostly important for the prediction of the fraction absorbed, while the permeability is the most important parameter for lung AUC and MRT. Intra-compound GSA highlighted that, for all the considered compounds, the permeability was one of the most important parameters for lung AUC, MRT and plasma MRT, while the extraction ratio and the dose for the plasma AUC. GSA is a crucial instrument for the quality assessment of model-based inference; for this reason, we suggest its use during both PBPK model development and use.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00499-0) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

Due to the opportunity of directly targeting the biophase of interest, the inhalation route has been considered a convenient way of drug administration for local treatment of lung-specific diseases, such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This route allows the administration of drugs at lower dosages, minimizing potential side effects driven by high systemic exposures. Topically active compounds for lung diseases have normally an adequate, and generally sustained, lung residence time (1–3). However, efforts have to be placed in the optimization of drug lung disposition looking for an optimal lung retention. In fact, an increased residence time in the airways could potentially translate into the risk of drug removal from the lung due to mucociliary clearance or into the risk of unsafe drug accumulation in pulmonary tissues. For this reason, it is necessary to maintain an appropriate balance between lung retention and absorption by the modulation of the interplay of some key properties, such as solubility, permeability and lung tissue binding.

Nowadays, administration by inhalation to rodents is still an important step in preclinical development of new drugs designed for the inhalation route. A mechanistic model able to predict pharmacokinetic quantities of interest after inhalation of new compounds in preclinical species could be extremely beneficial during drug discovery, for example for prioritizing compounds before animal experiments or for preclinical to clinical translation.

For these reasons, in a previous work we developed a physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model for inhaled drugs. This model was used to predict the compounds lung disposition in preclinical species (e.g. rodents), starting from physiological and in vitro parameters, such as mucociliary clearance rate, drug solubility and permeability.

In recent years sensitivity analysis, including global sensitivity analysis (GSA), has gained interest in PBPK modelling and simulation from both industry and academia (6–11). In a recent work, sensitivity, uncertainty and variability analyses were highlighted as tools able to improve the confidence in the context of inhalation PBPK modelling. Moreover, regulatory agencies highlighted that a sensitivity analysis should be performed during the process of development and refinement of PBPK models. Sensitivity analysis could be defined as “The study of how uncertainty in the output of a model (numerical or otherwise) can be apportioned to different sources of uncertainty in the model input”. GSA differs with respect to other types of sensitivity analysis, such as the local one, as it performs a multivariate variation of all the considered input parameters taken in their whole range of variation.

Like all the mechanistic models, physiological models have both uncertainty and variability in the model (input) parameters. Uncertainty refers to an incomplete understanding of the system, lack of data or error in the measurement/estimation of certain parameters. Variability instead refers to the inherent heterogeneity of the system properties or parameters, for example among subjects, experiments, or drugs. It is possible to reduce the uncertainty by performing better experiments and collect more data. Instead, it is impossible to reduce the variability (given a certain context); however, it could be better characterized (https://www.epa.gov/expobox/uncertainty-and-variability). Given the uncertainty (or variability) in the model parameters, it follows that also the predicted model outputs are uncertain (or variable) too. In our case, for example, the rat weight could be seen as a variable input parameter, while the values of the active and passive permeability across lung tissues as uncertain parameters. Pulmonary and plasma AUC are examples of pharmacokinetic output metrics of interest, whose uncertainties are driven by those of the model parameters.

Sensitivity analysis helps to get insights into the model behaviour as a function of the parameter variation. By performing this type of analysis, it is in fact possible to assess how much each parameter, with its variation, impacts the variation of the model outputs. Consequently, sensitivity analysis could be a valuable instrument to help in understanding if the model behaves as expected or what the parameters are that need to be more precisely known to allow reliable model predictions.

In this context, the aim of our work was to understand how GSA can be integrated in the process of PBPK model development and use. This was done within the case study of the in-house PBPK model for inhaled compounds in rats. Among all GSA methods, we choose the variance-based method because of its ability to detect interaction effects and to handle nonlinear and nonmonotonic relationships between the parameters and the model output (16–18).

In this work, we performed two types of GSA that differ in the aim and thus in the considered drug-specific parameter variability range: inter-compound and intra-compound GSA. Inter-compound GSA resembles the analysis done in Melillo et al. for intestinal absorption models. Each of the drug-related model parameters was considered variable in a range given by the minimum and the maximum value of the considered set of compounds. Thus, inter-compound GSA mainly focalize on the “between-drug” parameter variability and it is useful to understand the model behaviour in the subspace of all the considered compounds. The aim of this analysis is to understand what the key parameters are that mostly explain the differences in the model predictions among drugs. On the other hand, intra-compound GSA is focused on the parameter uncertainties related to a specific compound. This analysis has the purpose of finding the most important parameters that, with their uncertainty, mostly cause the model output uncertainty. In this work, intra-compound GSA was performed on three representative compounds belonging to the Chiesi Farmaceutici portfolio (namely A, B and C). For each compound, drug-related parameters were considered to vary in a range representing the parameter uncertainty.



DISCUSSION

In this manuscript, we showed how GSA techniques were used to assess model behaviours and support the development of a mechanistic model describing pulmonary absorption for inhaled compounds. We identified two ways of performing GSA that differ in the aims and, thus, in the considered parameter variability: inter-compounds and intra-compound. Both the approaches helped in understanding different model aspects.

The inter-compound GSA was performed for the absorption model decoupled from the distribution PBPK. This analysis can be performed in more “homogeneous” sub-spaces of the whole parameter space, as we have done distinguishing highly soluble from poorly soluble compounds. Looking at the model output distributions gives the possibility of assessing the extent of the inter-compound variability of the metrics of interest. Then, GSA helps in understanding what the parameters are that mostly determine the observed variation of the output predictions between different compounds. For example, from our analysis it was possible to understand that the between-compound differences in the lung AUC for the low solubility compounds are mainly driven by the variation of both solubility- and permeability-related parameters and that strong interaction effects are present. In particular, the latter means that the effect of solubility and permeability on the lung AUC is not additive. This information may be particularly useful if the inter-compound GSA results are used to inform the optimization of the compounds’ physicochemical properties. As a consequence of performing inter-compound GSA, we gained insights on the model behaviour and, consequently, we increased the knowledge of the model. For these characteristics, inter-compound GSA is particularly useful for the error detection. In fact, in case of discrepancies between the expected and the actual model behaviours, GSA gives useful information that helps in identifying the reasons and, thus, possible errors in the model assumptions or implementation. When the inter-compound GSA was applied for the first time to our in-house PBPK model (that was still in the development phase), we immediately noticed that the model did not behave as expected. Guided by the GSA results, we found and corrected the implementation error. The implementation of complex PBPK models often consists of thousands of lines of code and hundreds of parameters (this is particularly true for commercial PBPK software). A ‘little bug’ in the code may have a huge impact on the model behaviour. For its ability to assess the model behaviour, to help in the error detection and, as reported by Iooss and Saltelli, for the general GSA capability of helping in identifying sensitive assumptions, the inter-compound GSA is particularly useful during the process of model development. Theoretically, if the model structure and the physiological and inter-compound parameter variabilities are correctly identified and fixed, this analysis can be performed just once (e.g. when the model is firstly presented or at the PBPK platform release).

The intra-compound GSA was instead performed for three representative compounds on the whole body PBPK model. The parameter variation was defined to represent the uncertainties associated to their values for a specific compound. With this analysis it is possible to know how much the model output variation is apportioned to the uncertainty of the parameters. When doing this analysis, it is useful to look at the output distribution, to determine if it is narrow enough to be considered acceptable. If not, GSA helps in selecting which parameters should be known with less degree of uncertainty in order to give a more accurate prediction. For example, we believe that the uncertainty associated to compound A lung MRT is too high. So, if one is interested in using this model for lung MRT predictions (e.g. for different dosages or species), from the GSA results we know that a better characterization of the passive permeability is needed in order to reduce uncertainties of the considered metrics. This situation probably does not happen for compound A lung AUC, given that we believe that the uncertainty associated with the prediction of this metric can be considered acceptable. Differently from inter-compound GSA, intra-compound GSA should be performed each time the model (or the PBPK platform) is used for a specific drug.

One challenge that we have faced in performing GSA was that, in certain situations, determining the uncertainty or variability ranges was not an easy task, in particular for the intra-compound GSA. In fact, due to the lack of available data, it was sometimes difficult to appropriately quantify the parameters’ degree of uncertainty. In these cases, expert opinion can be used to fill this gap.

In our work, we presented the applications of inter-compound and intra-compound GSA in a preclinical setting involving animal models. However, the use of these analyses is not limited to this context. The results of the inter-compound GSA highlight how a simultaneous variation of the compounds’ physicochemical properties impacts the model outputs. This information could be particularly precious in guiding compound optimization in early discovery phases. Moreover, similarly to what was shown here, the inter-compound GSA can be used in clinics to understand how the model behaves varying together both drug- and subject-specific parameters. Moreover, a comparison of the clinical inter-compound GSA results with the ones from the preclinical setting could give insights on how physiological changes across the species impact the model results. Intra-compound GSA can be useful outside of the preclinical setting as well. For its characteristics, this analysis is particularly suitable when the model is used to predict unseen scenarios, such as for the first in human translation and for predicting the PK in different populations (e.g. paediatrics).
