
Abstract

The use of biologic-based therapeutics has revolutionized our ability to treat complex diseases such as cancer- and autoimmune-related disorders. Biologic-based therapeutics are known to generate anti-drug immune responses or immunogenicity in clinical patients which can lead to altered pharmacokinetics, decreased drug efficacy, and unwanted adverse clinical events. Assays designed to detect and assess anti-drug immune responses are used to help monitor patients and improve drug safety. Utilizing a tiered approach, screening assays are developed first to identify patients that are potentially positive for anti-drug-specific antibodies. Patients that screen positive are subjected to additional tiers of testing that include a confirmation assay to confirm the presence of expected anti-drug-specific antibodies, a titer assay to assess relative levels of anti-drug-specific antibodies, and, depending on the drug’s mechanism of action or concerns of adverse clinical reactions, further characterization such as drug neutralization and anti-drug antibody isotyping. This tiered approach can prove to be detrimental to clinical samples from exposure to multiple cycles of testing, freeze thaws, and repeated handling by lab personnel. Multiplexing some of these assays together may streamline the characterization of anti-drug immune responses and help reduce the repeated usage of clinical samples. In this study, we combined a screening assay and anti-drug isotyping assays into one multiplexed assay using the Luminex® xMAP® Technology. The multiplexed assay was developed and validated to meet the FDA recommended guidelines for immunogenicity assessments. These results show that multiplexed assays perform comparably to industry standards. This study should encourage labs to explore the use of multiplexing immunogenicity assays to characterize anti-drug antibody responses quickly, with less repeat testing and reduced sample handling.



INTRODUCTION

The pharmaceutical industry has generated many novel therapeutics that are typically protein-based molecules derived from biologic sources. However, the use of therapeutic protein products often initiates immune responses against the therapeutic protein that can potentially lead to adverse clinical events in patients (1–3). An early example is the use of recombinant human erythropoietin to treat anemia in patients with chronic renal failure. Most of the patients that were treated with recombinant human erythropoietin responded well resulting in increased red blood cell production. Unfortunately, some of these patients developed pure red blood cell aplasia that was resistant to further treatment with recombinant erythropoietin. Subsequent analysis revealed these patients were producing antibodies against the recombinant erythropoietin that neutralized its activity, which also bound to the endogenous form of the glycoprotein. This resulted in a severe downregulation of erythropoiesis and the development of pure red blood cell aplasia. Another example is cetuximab, which is a chimeric mouse/human IgG1 monoclonal antibody that binds to epithelial growth factor. Cancer patients treated with cetuximab sometimes had hypersensitivity reactions at the injection site attributed to the presence of pre-existing IgE antibodies against specific glycosylation sites present on the drug. These IgE antibodies were likely generated from previous exposure to certain grasses, pollen, and animal tissues expressing similar glycosylation modifications. Hypersensitivity reactions have been observed in multiple sclerosis patients treated with a humanized drug (natalizumab) which targets integrin alpha 4. Some of these patients developed rashes and had shortness of breath due to IgE-mediated hypersensitivity from the drug. Hemophilia A patients have been reported to develop IgG antibodies against recombinant factor VIII which diminished the effectiveness of the therapy. Other examples of unwanted clinical adverse events attributed to antibodies include treatment with erythromycin, infliximab, enzyme replacement therapies, and rapid drug clearance in patients that affect the pharmacokinetic profile of the drug. The industry and regulatory agencies have responded to these instances with strategies to detect and characterize anti-drug antibodies to improve drug safety.

Strategies for evaluating immunogenicity have been developed to detect the presence of anti-therapeutic antibodies or anti-drug antibodies (ADA) in drug development. These strategies rely upon a tiered approach involving a panel of immunogenicity assays. The first tiered assay is a qualitative screening assay used to determine the presence of ADA in a given sample. If a positive result is generated, the sample is subsequently tested in a confirmation assay that uses competitive binding with the drug to confirm the presence and drug-specificity of ADA. Confirmed positive samples may be subject to further immunogenicity assays including antibody titer assessment, drug neutralizing assays, cross-reactivity assays, and isotyping assessments. The sum of the data generated from these assays is used to assess and characterize ADA responses, and to help make informed decisions on drug safety.

There are a few disadvantages to using tiered approaches, such as subjecting the samples to multiple freeze-thaw cycles, repeated analysis in different assays, and limited sample volume especially with pediatric samples. Multiplexing some of these assays together may help alleviate these consequences by maximizing utilization of the sample to generate faster, more detailed results. There are many different combinations of immunogenicity assays that could be multiplexed together, such as screening, cross-reactivity, specificity, and isotyping. Published examples of immunogenicity assays being multiplexed together exist and are readily available. McCutcheon et al. developed a multiplexed ADA isotyping assay in cynomolgus monkeys treated with Raptiva (humanized monoclonal antibody to CD11a). The study showed the ability to measure IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE ADA antibodies in a single assay format. Granath et al. developed an ADA isotyping assay using beads from a commercial Luminex® isotyping kit. In this study, they immunized mice with a biologic drug and used isotype-specific bead sets to capture antibodies. Isotypes of drug-specific antibodies were assessed using biotin-labeled drug and streptavidin-phycoerythrin (SAPE). The authors showed that ADA titers from different isotypes could be measured using a multiplexed approach. While these studies have effectively shown that multiplexed assays are versatile and useful tools, the study in this paper describes the development of a multiplexed multi-tiered assay that combined screening and isotyping ADA assays. The isotyping portion of the assay was expanded to include the main classes and subclasses of immunoglobulins including IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4, IgM, IgE, IgA1, and IgA2. There are many technologies that can be used for multiplexing including Mesoscale Discovery, LC/MS, Biacore, Quanterix, Gyros, Imperacer, Squidlife Technologies, and Genalyte Maverick System. We selected the Luminex FLEXMAP 3D® system which offers flexibility to add/remove analytes in the lab (up to 500 bead sets), ease of coupling antibodies to beads, availability of reagents and instruments from many commercial vendors (MilliporeSigma Corporation, St. Louis, MO; Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA; R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN), and use to support clinical studies (23–25). This study describes the development, validation, and application of a multiplexed multi-tiered immunogenicity assay that combines a screening assay and isotyping analysis together. We selected the human monoclonal therapeutic Humira® as our experimental drug given its well described immunogenicity profile (26–30). Humira® (adalimumab) is a recombinant human IgG1 antibody that binds to TNFα and is approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease, and other inflammatory diseases. In summary, the data presented here demonstrate that it is feasible to combine different immunogenicity tiers together in a multiplexed assay format. The assay performed well overall and with further optimization, could be used to conduct immunogenicity assessment of ADA in a clinical trial setting.



DISCUSSION

The results presented in this study demonstrate that immunogenicity assays can be developed and multiplexed together using the Luminex xMAP Technology. We were able to show that a screening assay can be performed simultaneously with ADA isotyping assays in a multiplexed format. Although the assays were not fully optimized, they did perform well with regard to the FDA recommendations for immunogenicity assays. The overall sensitivity of the screening assay did not reach 100 ng/mL, per FDA recommendations; however, there are several strategies to improve the sensitivity that could be used to further optimize the assay. The number of beads/set per well in this study was 2500 beads/well; altering the levels of beads has been shown to impact the assay sensitivity. Increasing the number of beads per well can increase the binding capacity of the assay, leading to increased upper levels of sensitivity. Likewise, decreasing the number of beads per well may increase the lower limits of sensitivity. The concentration and coupling conditions used to couple the capture reagents to the beads influences their ability to capture analytes. Other isotype-specific antibodies may prove to be more efficient capture reagents which would improve sensitivity as well. The ADA enrichment step we used using biotinylated Humira® could also be further optimized to increase the amount of ADA enriched from the sample. This includes optimizing the amount of biotinylated Humira® used in the well, incubation time and temperature, and the use of streptavidin-coated beads in lieu of streptavidin-coated plates. Finally, the Luminex FLEXMAP 3D instrument utilizes the fluorescence of phycoerythrin to generate the assay signal. There are further calibration conditions that have been used that may increase the fluorescence, which can also impact the assay sensitivity.

The positive control antibody used in this study was a recombinant human IgG1 monoclonal antibody purchased from a commercial source. This positive control worked well in this study and showed positive signals in the IgG1 isotyping assay. Most immunogenicity assays rely on positive controls derived from hyperimmunized animals when drug-specific human monoclonal antibodies are not available. In these circumstances, additional bead sets coated with species-specific antibodies could be placed into the isotyping portion of the assay to allow for positive controls to be incorporated. There are strategies to generate additional controls by conjugating the positive control antibodies derived from animals with the Fc portion of different human isotypes. The resulting conjugate would retain the drug-binding portion of the positive control and the conjugated human Fc molecule would bind to the isotype capture bead set. Thus, these modified positive controls would be expected to generate signals in the isotyping assays described in this study.

Table III shows data from experiments evaluating the specificity of the different bead sets. Humira® itself is a human IgG1 kappa antibody which did bind to the IgG1 capture bead set and generate an MFI of 1053 (Table III-A). However, the positive control antibody generated a much higher MFI on the IgG1 capture bead. One explanation for this increased MFI is the total amount of biotin-Humira® in the final immune complex. In the case of biotin-Humira® by itself, only two biotin-Humira® antibodies would be bound for each anti-IgG1 capture antibody on the bead surface. In comparison, the number of biotin-Humira® antibodies after the positive control antibody is much higher. There would be two positive control antibodies bound to each anti-IgG1 capture antibody on the bead surface which subsequently binds four biotin-Humira® antibodies (two for each positive control antibody), generating a much higher MFI. It is also possible that the capture monoclonal anti-IgG1 antibody we used in this study may not bind well to biotin-Humira®. Other human monoclonal therapeutics used in this assay format would be expected to have background signals with the biotinylated drug alone on the corresponding anti-Fc bead set. In anticipation of this, one strategy to help mitigate this would be to insert a blocking step with a non-specific isotype control antibody between the sample incubation step and the addition of biotinylated drug. This would fill the remaining binding sites on the beads with non-specific antibodies and help mitigate the binding of biotin-drug to the beads. There is also a need to optimize the amount of biotinylated drug used in the assay to maximize the detection of drug-specific ADAs while minimizing the background MFI due to direct binding to the corresponding anti-Fc bead set. This will also help improve the overall sensitivity of the isotyping assay for the corresponding anti-Fc bead set.

We did observe high screening cut points in the isotyping assays for IgM (cut point of 6.49) and IgA (cut point of 2.36) in comparison to the other isotypes. IgM typically exists in a pentamer form and IgA exists mainly in the monomeric form in serum but there are low levels of dimeric, trimeric, and tetravalent IgA present in serum (most of the dimeric forms of IgA are found in mucosal secretions) (17,31–33). Furthermore, rheumatoid arthritis patients often have auto-antibodies including IgM and IgA that bind to the Fc portion of IgG. Therefore, the combination of the multivalent nature of IgM and IgA combined with their possible rheumatoid factor activity may have contributed to the high IgM and IgA cut points in the screening assays in comparison to the other isotyping assays.

Traditionally, immunogenicity screening assays are based on a bridging format where drug conjugates labeled with a detection molecule (such as biotin) are mixed in solution with the clinical sample. Immune complexes formed between the drug conjugates and the ADA present in the sample are subsequently captured on a streptavidin surface. This approach maximizes the availability of drug epitopes to be accessible to ADA; however, bridging formats rely on the ability of ADA to have both paratopes available to generate a signal. There has been concern over the ability of bridging assays to detect IgG4 ADA that have switched chains with other IgG4, which makes them monomeric for a given antigen. In these instances, monomeric IgG4 would not generate a positive signal in bridging assays. The isotyping assay format utilized in this study does not require both paratopes to be available in the enrichment step nor the isotyping assays, and is therefore uniquely able to detect monomeric IgG4 ADA present in serum.

This study demonstrates the ability to multiplex different immunogenicity assays together. The Luminex FLEXMAP 3D platform offers 500 different bead sets. Thus, it is plausible that other immunogenicity assays could be multiplexed in addition to the ones described here. One example would be cross-reactivity assessment where additional bead sets could be conjugated with related or non-related molecules. Epitope mapping is also possible by conjugating peptides with overlapping sequences on different bead sets. Additionally, reactivity to carbohydrate modifications, reactivity to polyethylene glycol (PEG), degradation products derived from the drug, or related drugs such as biosimilars could also be incorporated into the multiplex assay. In summary, multiplexing of immunogenicity assays is feasible and should be further explored in the industry. This approach has the potential to generate an abundance of additional information on ADA responses while reducing the amount of labor to generate additional data without sacrificing sample volume or risking sample integrity via excess handling.
