
Abstract

Considering the cognitive impairment induced by temozolomide (TMZ) in glioblastoma survivors, the present study was aimed to evaluate the protective effect of dehydrozingerone (DHZ) against TMZ-induced cognitive impairment (chemobrain) and C6 cell line-induced glioma in male Wistar rats. In both chemobrain and glioma models, TMZ was administered at a dose of 18 mg/kg i.v every 5th day and DHZ at a dose of 100 mg/kg p.o. daily. Additionally, glioma was induced by intracerebral injection of 5 × 104 C6 rat glioma cells in the cortex in the glioma model. Upon disease induction and treatment with TMZ + DHZ, spatial memory was assessed by the Morris water maze (MWM) test and episodic memory by the novel object recognition test (NORT). The induction of glioma was confirmed by histology of the cortex. Hippocampus and frontal cortex were subjected to antioxidant evaluation. Significant loss of spatial and episodic memory was observed with TMZ treatment which was significantly restored by DHZ. DHZ showed significant improvement in oxidative stress markers reversed the histopathological features in the cortex. TMZ-induced elevation of the glutathione level was also reversed by DHZ, indicating the role of DHZ in the reversal of TMZ resistance. In the glioma model, the improvement in cognition by DHZ correlated with the decrease in tumor volume. Altogether, the study results reveal the role of TMZ in worsening the memory and DHZ in reversing it, besides, improving its anticancer potential.



Introduction

Chemotherapy is one of the oldest treatment modalities aimed at reducing the tumor burden and improving progression-free overall survival after surgery or radiation therapy. Unfortunately, it is ill-famed to cause cognitive deficits in 70% of cancer patients, of which about 50% report a significant decline in cognitive processes. This is mainly due to its non-selective actions affecting both cancer cells and normal cells. Chemotherapy mediated neurotoxicity has gained much importance in recent years, mainly manifested by impaired attention, executive functions, memory, etc., even after cessation of therapy, consequently compromising the quality of life. This is termed as ‘chemo-fog’ or ‘chemo-brain’ (Lucassen 2012).

Glioma/glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive primary tumor of the glial cells manifested by memory problems, headaches, personality changes, seizures, speech problems, and weakness/numbness in the arms, legs, and face. It is the 3rd most cause of death by cancer in patients of 15–34 years of age. Malignant gliomas are the reason for 2.5% of deaths due to cancers. The standard care of treatment includes surgery/radiation (Hanif et al. 2017). Based on large number of clinical trials, the DNA alkylating agent, temozolomide (TMZ) was approved for the management of glioma as adjuvant therapy (Mrugala and Chamberlain 2008). TMZ, an imidazole derivative, is a prodrug that readily converts into an active metabolite, 5-(3-methyl)-1-triazen-1-yl-imidazole-4-carboxamide (MTIC) systemically. This metabolite acts by hypermethylation at GGG DNA sequences and inactivation of repair enzyme O6 methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) which initiates apoptosis, ultimately resulting in glioma cell death (Dietrich et al. 2015b; Barciszewska et al. 2015). TMZ is readily permeable through the blood–brain barrier, as a result, it produces direct toxicity to the normal cells of the brain leading to impaired hippocampal neurogenesis and disruption in the associative learning (Bird et al. 2016). In the adult brain, the hippocampus is responsible for the formation and retention of episodic and spatial memory (Qu et al. 2017; Ganeshpurkar and Saluja 2017; Ramalingayya et al. 2017). Hippocampal neurogenesis in the adult brain occurs by the process of generating new granule cell neurons. This process regulates the maintenance of brain plasticity, learning, and memory. TMZ treatment for glioblastoma is implicated in the impairment of hippocampal neurogenesis showing disruption in theta activity of the brain which determines the decline in learning and memory and disturbance in communication between brain centers, i.e., inter-regional communication, confirming impairment in cognitive ability (Dietrich et al. 2015b). However, the lack of animal models in this context hinders the research on the evaluation of neuroprotective potentials of various protective agents.

Dehydrozingerone (DHZ) is an unsaturated derivative of ginger rhizome and is a by-product of curcumin (Rajakumar and Rao 1993). Curcumin, a component extracted from the rhizome of the plant Curcuma longa, has proven antidepressant, antibacterial, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidative properties. DHZ is the half analog of curcumin. Both the compounds are styryl ketones with the phenolic group at the para position and the methoxy group at the ortho position to the phenolic group. The major difference being the presence of a 1,3-diketone system in curcumin which is not seen in DHZ. Like curcumin, DHZ has shown anti-cancer, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective, and chemoprotective effects (Ozeki et al. 2012). Thus, the present study was designed to evaluate the protective effect of DHZ in TMZ-induced cognitive impairment in normal (chemobrain) and C6-induced glioblastoma rats.


