
Abstract

Identification of the biopharmaceutical risks of excipients and excipient variability on oral drug performance can be beneficial for the development of robust oral drug formulations. The current study investigated the impact of Hypromellose (HPMC) presence and varying viscosity type, when used as a binder in immediate release formulations, on the apparent solubility of drugs with wide range of physicochemical properties (drug ionization, drug lipophilicity, drug aqueous solubility). The role of physiological conditions on the impact of excipients on drug apparent solubility was assessed with the use of pharmacopoeia (compendial) and biorelevant media. Presence of HPMC affected drug solubility according to the physicochemical properties of studied compounds. The possible combined effects of polymer adsorption (drug shielding effect) or the formation of a polymeric viscous layer around drug particles may have retarded drug dissolution leading to reduced apparent solubility of highly soluble and/or highly ionized compounds and were pronounced mainly at early time points. Increase in the apparent solubility of poorly soluble low ionized drugs containing a neutral amine group was observed which may relate to enhanced drug solubilization or reduced drug precipitation. The use of multivariate data analysis confirmed the importance of drug physicochemical properties on the impact of excipients on drug apparent solubility and revealed that changes in HPMC material properties or amount may not be critical for oral drug performance when HPMC is used as a binder. The construction of a roadmap combining drug, excipient, and medium characteristics allowed the identification of the cases where HPMC presence may present risks in oral drug performance and bioavailability.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-019-0411-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

The potential influence of excipients on the performance of solid oral dosage forms is a topic of great interest in terms of pharmaceutical Quality by Design (QbD). Further to their intended use, excipients may affect the properties and performance of final dosage forms leading to batch inconsistencies, altered bioavailability and bioinequivalence of products (1–3). Excipient variability (changes in material properties) and variation (changes in amount) constitute an additional obstacle to robust manufacturing, as changes in excipient material properties can undermine the critical quality attributes of the final product. Moreover, excipient inertness is questionable as their presence can influence oral drug absorption. Understanding the biopharmaceutical risks of excipient presence will pave the way for manufacturing products with robust product performance.

Binders are typically used in solid dosage form manufacturing to promote adequate mechanical strength of granules or tablets. Hypromellose, also called hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), is a polymeric binder used in wet granulation. HPMC is a water soluble non-ionic cellulosic polymer substituted with methoxy and hydroxypropyl groups (Fig. 1). In addition to its binding properties, HPMC is extensively used as a release controlling excipient. This dual functionality depends on excipient level (2% w/w to 5% w/w as binder and 10% w/w to 80% w/w as release modifier) and viscosity type (high viscosity grades are typically used to control drug release). The effectiveness of HPMC can be influenced by its swelling and gelling properties which can delay drug dissolution or release or by the presence of other excipient types in a formulation.Fig. 1Chemical structure of Hypromellose (ChemDraw Professional 15.0)

Fig. 1

Chemical structure of Hypromellose (ChemDraw Professional 15.0)

Molecular properties (molecular weight, degree of substitution, substitution pattern), particle properties (particle size distribution) and excipient level have been identified as critical material attributes affecting excipient and product performance. Molecular weight and excipient level directly relate to the formation of a viscous HPMC gel layer. HPMC brands of high molecular weight swell faster and form a thicker viscous layer compared to low molecular weight brands. The formation of thick viscous layers when increasing HPMC molecular weight is attributed to the slow rate of polymer erosion. Real-time surface dissolution UV imaging demonstrated the complex polymeric network formed by high molecular weight HPMC brands and the susceptibility of low molecular weight HPMC brands to erosion. Due to the proportionality of HPMC molecular weight and viscosity of its aqueous solutions, high molecular weight excipient brands correspond to high viscosity HPMC types. The formation and thickness of the gel layer depend also on the level of HPMC in solid dosage forms. Increasing the level of HPMC results in a concentrated and viscous gel layer either due to increased chain entanglement or slow polymer erosion rate. A minimum excipient concentration (referred to as excipient percolation threshold) under which HPMC cannot form an effective viscous layer able to control drug release was reported. The percolation thresholds of different viscosity type HPMC brands were similar (20% v/v corresponding to 20% w/w) and showed consistent controlled drug release (verapamil HCl, United States Pharmacopeia (USP 2) apparatus, 50 rpm, 900 mL, phosphate buffer pH 7.5) from extended release tablets containing HPMC. Use of confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed that the early gel layer formation depends on the level of HPMC. Hydrophilic matrices containing 5% w/w and 10% w/w of HPMC formed a thin and heterogeneous gel layer initially (5–15 min), which could not be maintained due to the increased water uptake accelerating polymer erosion.

Several biopharmaceutical factors affecting the impact of HPMC on product performance have been identified. The performance of HPMC depends on the composition and properties of the dissolution medium. Salts, sugars and food components interact with the polymeric chains of HPMC and affect the formation of the gel layer. Moreover, bile salts were found to affect the thermal transition (gel formation) of cellulosic polymers. The hydrophobic parts of bile salts adsorb onto the hydrophobic regions of polymers and increase the excipient transition temperature upon heating. The pH of the dissolution medium can also affect the swelling/gelling properties of HPMC due to changes in the transport behaviour of water into the polymer, despite the non-ionic nature of HPMC. Rapid polymer hydration and larger excipient swelling were observed in media of basic (24% increase in polymer diameter after 200 min at pH = 6) compared to acidic pH (15% increase in polymer diameter after 200 min at pH = 2) [pH defined as basic and acidic according to the physiological pH range]. The authors highlighted the biopharmaceutical consequence of this polymeric response as faster drug release should be expected in the acidic gastric compared to the basic intestinal compartment.

The aim of this study was to assess the biopharmaceutical impact and criticality of HPMC variability and variation (when used as a binder in immediate release formulations) on drug apparent solubility. HPMC variability and variation were addressed by selecting three HPMC brands of different viscosity type using two different excipient levels (low: 2% w/w, high: 5% w/w). The biopharmaceutical implications of HPMC variability on drug apparent solubility were examined by choosing compounds of a wide range of physicochemical properties (drug ionization, drug lipophilicity, drug aqueous solubility) and media (compendial and biorelevant) simulating the gastrointestinal conditions. Multivariate data analysis (partial least squares (PLS)) and roadmaps were used to identify the critical role of certain variables (drug properties, excipient presence, medium characteristics) on the impact of HPMC on drug apparent solubility.

Materials

APIs: sulfamethoxazole (SMX) and paracetamol (PRC) were obtained from Fisher Scientific (UK). Furosemide (FRS), itraconazole (ITZ) and dipyridamole (DPL) were obtained from VWR (UK). Ibuprofen (IBU), carbamazepine (CBZ) and metformin (MTF) were obtained from Fagron (UK). Excipients: HPMC-Sigma was obtained from Sigma Aldrich (UK). Pharmacoat 606 and Pharmacoat 615 were obtained from Shinetsu (Japan). Chemicals: acetic acid (> 99.7%), hydrochloric acid 36.5–38%, high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade methanol, HPLC grade acetonitrile, dichloromethane, pepsin (from porcine) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (UK). Maleic acid, sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, potassium phosphate monobasic, sodium dihydrogen orthophosphate dihydrate, disodium hydrogen orthophosphate dihydrate, potassium dihydrogen orthophosphate, anhydrous sodium sulfate, HPLC grade trifluoroacetic acid were obtained from Fisher Scientific (UK). Sodium taurocholate (Prodotti Chimici Alimentari S.P.A., Italy), egg lecithin–Lipoid EPCS (Lipoid GmbH, Germany), were obtained from the sources specified. Water was ultra-pure (Milli-Q) laboratory grade. Filters: Whatman® 13 mm cellulose nitrate filters 0.45 μm pore size and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 13 mm filter 0.45 μm pore size were purchased from Fisher Scientific (UK).

Instrumentation

Fisherbrand waterbath (Fisher Scientific, UK), Sartorius BP 210 D balance (Sartorius Ltd., UK), Buchi R114 Rotavapor (Buchi, Switzerland), Mettler Toledo SevenCompact S210 pH meter (Mettler Toledo, Switzerland), Vortex-Genie 2 vortex mixer (Scientific Industries Inc., USA), Agilent Technologies 1100 series HPLC system (quaternary pump (G1311A), autosampler (G1313A), thermostatted column compartment (G1316A), diode array detector (G1329A) and Chemstation software (Agilent Technologies, USA).


