
Abstract

In clinical trials within lower urinary tract symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH-LUTS), the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) is commonly the primary efficacy outcome while the Quality of Life (QoL) score and the BPH Impact Index (BII) are common secondary efficacy markers. The current study aimed to characterize BPH-LUTS progression using responses to the IPSS, the QoL, and the BII in an integrated item response theory (IRT) framework and assess the Fisher information of each scale. The power of this approach to detect a drug effect was compared with an IRT approach considering only IPSS responses. A unidimensional and a bidimensional pharmacometric IRT model, based on item-level IPSS responses in a clinical trial with 403 patients, were extended by incorporating patients’ QoL and summary BII scores over the 6-month trial period. In the developed unidimensional integrated model, the QoL score was found to be the most informative, representing 17% of the total Fisher information, while the combined information content of the seven IPSS items represented 70.6%. In the bidimensional model, “storage” and both storage and “voiding” disability drove QoL and summary BII responses, respectively. Sample size reduction of 16% to detect a drug effect at 80% power was obtained with the unidimensional integrated IRT model compared with its counterpart IPSS IRT model. This study shows that utilizing the information content across the IPSS, QoL, and BII scales in an integrated IRT framework results in a modest but meaningful increase in power to detect a drug effect.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00484-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

As the prostate enlarges with age, older men may suffer from the obstruction of the prostatic urethra and deterioration of the urethral sphincter function. This condition is known as benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and is estimated to affect 50% of the male population by age 60 years. Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) often develop due to BPH and are thought to stem from a combination of both static and dynamic factors of BPH as well as the bladder’s response to outflow obstruction. The prevalence of BPH-LUTS is similar across different countries (6–11) and can hence be considered a medical condition with a substantial impact on public health globally speaking.

To assess BPH-LUTS, which, in addition to urinary function, may impact patients’ general well-being as well as different facets of their everyday life, three validated, disease-specific, patient-reported outcomes (PROs) are conventionally used. The International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS) (also called as the American Urological Association Symptom index) is the most widely used PRO within BPH-LUTS and consists of seven items that each can be rated from zero to five. IPSS voiding items describe the severity of a feeling of incomplete emptying of the bladder following urination, urination intermittency, the urgency to urinate, the weakness of the urinary stream, and straining during urination. IPSS storage items describe urination frequency, the urgency to urinate, and nocturia. Current versions of the IPSS questionnaire include an additional question following the seven IPSS items, known as the Quality of Life (QoL) or “bother” question. The QoL question assesses a patient’s perception of his current health state by asking how he would feel if he were to spend the rest of his life with his urinary condition. It can be rated from zero to six, zero corresponding to “Delighted” and six to “Terrible.” Lastly, the BPH Impact Index (BII) is a four-item questionnaire that assesses the physical discomfort associated with urinary problems, the degree of worrying regarding health due to urinary problems, the perception of overall bother associated with urination, and the hindering of performance of desired activities due to urinary problems. Three of the BII items are rated from zero to three while one is rated from zero to four, resulting in a summary BII ranging from zero to 13.

In clinical trials investigating treatment of BPH-LUTS, the summary IPSS is conventionally specified as the primary efficacy outcome measure, while the QoL and summary BII are specified as secondary efficacy markers. These three scales may contribute different insights into BPH-LUTS, and it may hence be of value to regard the information of these scales jointly rather than separately to more precisely determine the severity of BPH-LUTS in patients. Item Response Theory (IRT) models can be used to incorporate information from multiple PROs to assess the impact of a given disease, giving higher weight to more sensitive PROs, while still capturing information from less sensitive ones. As its name suggests, IRT utilizes the item-level responses in questionnaires to estimate an individual’s level of disability (e.g., underlying BPH-LUTS), the sensitivity of each item to change in disability, and the thresholds of item scores along the disability scale. Because IRT uses item-level data and quantifies item sensitivity, an integrated IRT model regarding information from the IPSS, QoL, and BII jointly may allow for a powerful approach for assessing BPH-LUTS and detecting drug effects. IRT analyses combining information from different scales have been performed within the therapeutic areas of neonatal pain and migraine, but, to date, not within BPH-LUTS.

Building on a recent pharmacometric IRT model based on item-level IPSS data in a clinical trial with the GnRH antagonist degarelix, the current study aims to characterize BPH-LUTS progression by joint analysis of item-level IPSS, the QoL score, and BII data in an integrated IRT framework while assessing the informativeness of each scale. The power of this integrated BPH-LUTS IRT model to detect a drug effect will be compared with the longitudinal IRT model considering only IPSS responses.



DISCUSSION

The current paper presents models integrating multiple BPH-LUTS scales using IRT. To our knowledge, this is the first model integrating several endpoints within the therapeutic area. We investigated the information content within different BPH-LUTS measures and compared the power to detect a treatment effect of the integrated IRT approach with a previously developed IRT models that considered only IPSS responses. Assessing the effect of drugs on the voiding and storage IPSS subscores is common practice in BPH-LUTS clinical trials although its clinical meaningfulness is not established (13,23,35–37). A previous longitudinal bidimensional IRT model, based on item-level IPSS, aimed to reflect this type of analysis while preserving item-level information; in the current work, this model was further extended by including data from the QoL and BII scales. This allowed further characterization of underlying disability and differentiation of the effect of treatment on the “generalized” voiding and storage latent variables, respectively.

In the unidimensional integrated BPH-LUTS IRT model, all scales were modeled assuming a common underlying disability. Unidimensional IRT modeling allows for determination of which item best describes latent disability amongst all items in all BPH-LUTS scales. This overall perspective is lost in a multidimensional IRT setting, since here inference regarding information content can only be made within each scale separately. This may explain why other pharmacometric IRT studies have applied a unidimensional modeling approach to analyze responses from multiple scales (18–20). In the current unidimensional model, the QoL item was found to be the overall most informative, contributing to 17% of the total information content, highlighting the importance of this question for assessing BPH-LUTS. The IPSS incomplete emptying item was the second-most informative item, yielding 15.4% of the total Fisher information. This is in line with the previously presented unidimensional IPSS IRT model, where the incomplete emptying item was found to be the most informative. Approximately 70% of the total information content was accounted for by the IPSS items, confirming the importance of this scale in characterizing BPH-LUTS and supporting its common use as a primary outcome measure in BPH-LUTS clinical trials. The higher combined information content contribution of IPSS voiding items compared with IPSS storage items is also in line with results from the previous IPSS IRT analysis.

The minimal detectable difference (MDD) in observed total IPSS has previously been reported as being at least three points and the current work supports this as decreases in latent disability were strictly observed using this threshold (in accordance with 99.9% of the data). However, as discussed in previous work, decreases in latent disability may also be obtained above the MDD, advocating the use of an IRT approach rather than regarding only the summary IPSS to assess patient’s underlying BPH-LUTS. For the QoL score, a decrease of at least one point corresponds to predominantly decreases in IRT-derived latent disability (in 96.8% of patients as shown in the Supplemental Material). This is in line with previous research, where mean QoL reductions ranging 0.5 to 0.8 corresponded to perceived disease improvement in different groups of patients. Furthermore, other authors have used a decrease in QoL score of one as this represents a qualitative change on an ordinal scale. The current findings may thus have implications for clinical research and the assessment of drug efficacy within BPH-LUTS based on the QoL score. A decrease of at least 0.5 BII points (i.e., 1 point on the observed level) has been reported as the MDD for this scale. The current results are in line with this, as this to a large extent corresponds to decreases in latent disability (in 93.6% of patients as shown in the Supplemental Material).

The effect of post-void residual volume (PVR) on baseline latent disability was the only covariate relationship retained in the longitudinal unidimensional integrated IRT model following the stepwise procedure. Weak correlation between symptom severity as expressed by the IPSS and physiologic measures, here amongst PVR, has been reported. However, the current finding suggests that post-void residual volume is indicative of underlying BPH-LUTS severity as assessed by several disease-specific scales, and further research should aim to confirm this finding.

Factor analysis with two dimensions indicated that IPSS storage items and the QoL score were predominantly correlated with the same dimension. This is supported by the correlation between IPSS storage items and the QoL score previously highlighted by other authors (15,41–43). High correlation between the BIIsummary item and both the storage as well as voiding disability was observed, and a compensatory model was used to describe this finding. Each individual BII item may be separately correlated with either the storage or voiding disability, ultimately leading to the BIIsummary reflecting this. Very limited research has to date been performed examining the level of correlation between individual IPSS and BII items, and these indicate that a combination of IPSS voiding and storage items may correlate with the BIIsummary. The compensatory model used in the current work allows for a high value on either the voiding or storage disability scale to potentially compensate for a low value on the other scale, ultimately resulting in a high probability of a BIIsummary score. It may be of interest to investigate other within-item multidimensional models, such as the non-compensatory/partially compensatory model, where high disability on both scales is needed to obtain a high score probability. Due to its complexity and requirement of a larger number of parameters (separate difficulty parameters on each scale), this type of within-item multidimensionality was not investigated in the current work. Compared with a longitudinal bi-dimensional integrated IRT model solely attributing the BIIsummary item to the voiding latent variable, the compensatory model yielded a drop in AIC of 54.9 points (data not shown).

Incorporating longitudinal QoL and BII scores along with longitudinal item-level IPSS responses in the pharmacometric IRT framework reduced the sample size by 16% to detect a drug effect at 80% compared with considering only item-level IPSS responses. This finding showcases the benefit of utilizing all available information from disease-specific scales within BPH-LUTS to assess treatment effect in a clinical trial setting, made possible by the IRT approach. Quantification of the increase in power to detect a drug effect when simultaneously modeling all scale endpoints as opposed to only considering the primary endpoint marker has to our knowledge not been presented within other therapeutic areas. It may therefore be of interest to further investigate the power of the integrated IRT approach in therapeutic areas where clinical trials commonly include multiple disease-specific scales to assess the treatment effect. The currently reported relative increase in power to detect a drug effect with the integrated unidimensional IRT model is expected to be similar within the context of bidimensional IRT modeling, considering that the difference in modeled data is the same (IPSS, QoL, and BII vs. only IPSS). Although the longitudinal bidimensional integrated IRT model yielded a much better fit in terms of likelihood, its complexity and resulting instability may ultimately favor use of the unidimensional approach, which also described the data adequately. For these reasons, comparison of power between the integrated and IPSS bidimensional model, respectively, was not investigated in the current work. Lastly, the observed total IPSS is the common primary endpoint marker in BPH-LUTS clinical trials while pharmacometric IRT focuses on latent disability as the estimand summary measure. Pharmacometric IRT possesses higher power to detect a drug effect compared with the total IPSS approach, and hence the latter may not be meaningfully applied when the sample size is determined based on IRT-derived latent disability (using only item-level IPSS or multiple BPH-LUTS scales, respectively).

A limitation of the current study is that item-level BII scores were not available for analysis. The information content of each individual BII item is likely to vary, whereas only considering the summary score, as in the current study, assumes it is the same. Accounting for this variation in information content across BII items within the IRT framework may further increase the characterization of BPH-LUTS as well as the power to detect a drug effect of the integrated IRT model. Incorporating summary-level score data as an item, when item-level data are not available, has been reported previously in integrated IRT modeling. Although inferior compared with analyzing item-level BII scores, ignoring the BIIsummary data will lead to a loss of information, as shown by its Fisher Information content contribution in the unidimensional integrated IRT model (Table II). Further, the BIIsummary was assessed at three visits (baseline, 3 months post-dose, and 6 months post-dose) while item-level IPSS and the QoL score were measured at eight visits. The lower number of BIIsummary observations may explain the overall higher uncertainty of BIIsummary difficulty parameters compared with those estimated for individual IPSS items and the QoL score. Moreover, similar to the longitudinal bidimensional IRT model based on item-level IPSS as well as other multidimensional pharmacometric IRT models, the complexity of the longitudinal bidimensional integrated IRT model led to instability issues. It was hence not possible to obtain the uncertainty of longitudinal parameters or perform covariate analysis for this model. For the same reason, simultaneous estimation of ICCs and longitudinal parameters was not possible. More advanced and time-consuming techniques such as the bootstrap may be used to obtain parameter precision but was not performed here. The longitudinal bidimensional integrated IRT model minimized succesfully and showed adequate item and summary-level data description as assessed through VPCs; the longitudinal parameters were therefore ultimately deemed trustworthy. Lastly, in the longitudinal unidimensional integrated IRT model, simultaneously estimating the ICCs and longitudinal parameters decreased the objective function value by 16.7 points (data not shown) compared with fixing the ICCs. This was not significant given 63 degrees of freedom (63 ICC parameters) under a χ2 distribution.

Although validated to assess BPH-LUTS, neither the IPSS, the QoL score, or the BII assesses incontinence, which may be an important and bothersome symptom in patients with BPH-LUTS. Extending the current models to include such information using, e.g., the Incontinence Severity Index, the Epidemiology of LUTS questionnaire, and/or the International Consultation on Incontinence Modular Questionnaire may further enhance the characterization of BPH-LUTS and its progression as well as further increase the power to detect a drug effect compared with only regarding the IPSS. In this context, it may also be of benefit to investigate the inclusion of generic PROs such as, e.g., the EuroQol-5 Domain scale (EQ-5D) and the Visual Analogue Scale, potentially while guiding responses from these scales towards BPH-LUTS using a supervised IRT approach.
