
Abstract

Suspended human hepatocytes (SHH) have long been used in assessing hepatic drug uptake, while plated human hepatocytes in short-term monolayer culture (PHH) have gained use in recent years. This study aimed to cross-evaluate SHH and PHH in measuring the hepatic uptake mediated by organic anion transporting polypeptide 1Bs (OATP1Bs). We compared the time courses of cell-to-medium (C/M) concentration ratios and initial uptake clearance values of the OATP1B substrates (pitavastatin, rosuvastatin, cerivastatin, pravastatin, dehydropravastatin, and SC-62807) between SHH and PHH. For all compounds except cerivastatin, the C/M ratios in SHH displayed an apparent overshoot (an initial increase followed by a decrease) during the 180-min uptake experiment, but not in PHH. Based on the literature evidence suggesting the possible internalization of OATP1Bs in primary hepatocytes, separate experiments measured the drug uptake after varying lengths of pre-incubation in the drug-free medium. The initial uptake clearances of pitavastatin and rosuvastatin declined in SHH beyond an apparent threshold time of 20-min drug-free pre-incubation, but not in PHH. Kinetic modeling quantitatively captured the decline in the active uptake clearance in SHH, and more than half of the active uptake clearances of pitavastatin and rosuvastatin were prone to loss during the 180-min uptake experiment. These results suggested a partial, time-delayed loss of the functional OATP1Bs in SHH upon prolonged incubation. Our results indicate that PHH is more appropriate for experiments where a prolonged incubation is required, such as estimation of unbound hepatocyte-to-medium concentration ratio (Kp,uu) at the steady-state.

Electronic supplementary material

The online version of this article (10.1208/s12248-020-00512-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



INTRODUCTION

The liver is a major organ responsible for the elimination of many drugs. The accurate assessment of hepatic clearance is essential in predicting the pharmacokinetic profiles of drug candidates in humans. In the case of anionic molecules, entry to hepatocytes often relies on uptake transporters, which can be the rate-determining step in the overall hepatic drug elimination. Thus, it has become a standard practice to assess anionic drug candidates for their uptake clearance at the physiological pH, and to apply the in vitro uptake clearance to the extended clearance concept for prediction of the overall hepatic clearance in humans.

During drug discovery and development, the uptake clearance of drug candidates is determined using various in vitro systems and scaled to that in the whole liver. The scaled hepatic clearance is then used along with other organ clearances to predict the total body clearance. In evaluating hepatic uptake clearance, the available in vitro systems include human primary hepatocytes in suspension (SHH) or short-term monolayer culture (PHH) and more complex three-dimensional cultures (e.g., hepatocyte spheroids, liver-on-a-chip) (4–6). However, complex experimental systems grown in multi-layer or aggregates can hinder access of drug molecules to the hepatocyte surface, making it difficult to quantitatively determine the drug uptake rates per million cells. Thus, human primary hepatocytes in the SHH or PHH format continue to be the standard and practical in vitro systems in quantifying the hepatic uptake of drugs.

Previously, we observed that drug uptake (often presented as the cell-to-medium (C/M) concentration ratios) sometimes displays an overshoot phenomenon (an initial increase, followed by a decrease) over time in SHH. For example, the C/M ratios of rosuvastatin (RSV) showed an overshoot during uptake studies using SHH. Such an overshoot in the uptake measurements makes it difficult to decide which values (minimum, maximum, or average values) are appropriate in estimating the parameters such as the unbound hepatocyte-to-medium concentration ratio (Kp,uu) at the steady-state (a vital parameter to predict the drug levels available for hepatic metabolism and interactions with intracellular targets). It is thus important to enhance our understanding of the possible sources for the data variability in drug uptake.

The members of the organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B subfamily (OATP1Bs) play an important role in the hepatic uptake of many anionic drugs, including several statins, whose overall hepatic handling is limited by active uptake clearance. Like many transmembrane proteins, the expression of OATP1Bs is not static but dynamically regulated by the coordinated processes of de novo synthesis, intracellular processing and trafficking including internalization, and recycling. For example, protein kinase C (PKC) activation triggers the internalization of OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 thereby decreasing the functional transporter on the cell surface: the functional decline occurred 10–60 min after the addition of a PKC activator to the sandwich-cultured human hepatocytes (SCHH) or HEK293 cells stably expressing OATP1B1 or OATP1B3. However, it is currently unknown whether and to what extent the localization and activity of OATP1Bs may change during the period of in vitro uptake studies using human primary hepatocytes in the SHH or PHH format.

The aim of the present study was to cross-evaluate the performance of SHH and PHH in measuring the hepatic uptake of several OATP1B substrates [RSV, pitavastatin (PTV), cerivastatin (CRV), pravastatin (PRV), dehydropravastatin (DHP), and SC-62807 (celecoxib carboxylic acid)]. The time courses of drug uptake (C/M ratios, cellular uptake amounts, and drug concentrations in the medium) were compared between SHH and PHH derived from the same donors. For PTV and RSV, their initial uptake clearances were measured following varying lengths of pre-incubation in drug-free medium. To gain kinetic insights into the observed decline of the uptake clearance, a kinetic model was constructed for the hepatic uptake of PTV and RSV.



DISCUSSION

Hepatic uptake clearance is well-recognized as one of the important contributors to the overall hepatic handling of anionic drugs, often mathematically explained using the extended clearance concept. For anionic drug candidates, quantitative assessment of the hepatic uptake clearance is essential in the prediction of their in vivo pharmacokinetic profiles. Previously, we observed that the C/M ratios obtained in SHH sometimes display an apparent overshoot instead of a steady pattern over time. Such an overshoot in the uptake data is problematic in deciding which C/M ratio values (minimum, maximum, or average) to use in estimating the parameters such as the Kp,uu at the steady-state. In contrast to SHH, which have long been used in assessing the hepatic drug uptake, PHH have gained use only in recent years (15–17). Here, we aimed to cross-evaluate the performances of SHH and PHH in assessing the drug uptake of several OATP1B substrates and to identify possible sources for data variability in the uptake experiments thereby enabling informed selection of appropriate experimental systems.

The current study compared the time courses of the drug uptake between SHH and PHH derived from the same lots of human hepatocytes to minimize the inter-batch and inter-donor differences among human primary hepatocytes. The overshoot phenomenon was observed in SHH, but not in PHH (Figs. 2 and 3 for lot HH1045; Figs. S1 and S2 for lot HH1052), supporting that the different culturing conditions may contribute in part to the data variability. The overshoot phenomenon in the C/M ratios was not observed for CRV (Figs. 3 and S2). For CRV, the contribution of the transporter-mediated uptake may be smaller than other statins. Several reports have previously indicated that OATP1Bs might internalize constitutively, and the internalization rates may be accelerated by cellular signaling (e.g., PKC). Moreover, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 appear internalized in cryopreserved human hepatocytes fixed 1 h post-plating, in contrast to human liver sections, which showed that OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 localized predominantly on the membrane surface. Based on those findings, we hypothesized that OATP1Bs may internalize from the cell surface over time, decreasing the uptake clearance mediated by OATP1Bs in SHH. We chose two compounds, PTV and RSV (based on their high uptake clearances mainly mediated by OATP1Bs), and assessed their initial uptake clearances in SHH following pre-incubation in the drug-free medium. As shown in Table I, the initial uptake clearances of PTV and RSV decreased with increasing drug-free pre-incubation time. However, the remaining uptake clearances of PTV and RSV in the presence of rifamycin SV (30 μM) showed no declining trend (Table I). Of note, the recent studies reported that the complete inhibition of active influx transporters (both OATP1Bs and non-OATP1B transporters) in hepatocytes requires the rifamycin SV concentrations of 1 mM or higher. Thus, the measured uptake clearances of PTV and RSV in the presence of rifamycin SV (30 μM) likely include the uptake clearance via active influx by non-OATP1B transporters as well as passive diffusion. By performing the kinetic modeling, we were able to quantify the extent of the active uptake clearance susceptible to a decline when SHH were incubated for an extended time (20 min or longer): 65% for PTV and 49% for RSV (Table III).

The exact mechanisms for a partial, time-delayed loss in the active uptake clearance in SHH warrant further investigations. Using trypan blue exclusion testing, we found no major decline in qualitative cell viability during some of our experiments using SHH (data not shown). We cannot entirely exclude the possible contribution of compromised cell viability to the observed loss in the active uptake clearance. Another possibility that can account for a partial, time-delayed loss in the uptake clearance would be a decline in the driving force for the active uptake. To date, the driving force for OATP1Bs remains unclear: early studies reported the possible involvement of bicarbonate and reduced glutathione as the driving force (20–23), but such findings were not replicated. Thus, it is difficult to verify whether a decline in the driving force indeed contributes to the observed decline in the active uptake clearance in SHH. Another potential mechanism may involve the internalization of the transporters from the membrane surface, resulting in a decreased level of functional transporters. It has been reported that PKC activation triggers rapid internalization of OATPs from the membrane. For instance, the treatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (a PKC activator) initiated a rapid and reversible internalization of OATP1B1, OATP1B3, or OATP2B1 within 15–60 min. No information is currently available for the internalization rates of OATP1Bs. Further investigations would be necessary to assess the cellular localization status of OATP1Bs in SHH upon prolonged incubation by performing immunolocalization studies (with the treatment of a PKC activator/inhibitor), elucidate the mechanism(s) underlying the observed, time-delayed decline in the uptake clearance in SHH and to assess the internalization rates of OATPs under various culturing conditions. For the compounds used in the current study (particularly, RSV and PTV whose uptake is mediated mainly by OATP1Bs; greater than 70%, Fig. S3), the internalization of OATP1Bs is suspected as a possible mechanism. However, we cannot exclude the possibility for the internalization of other uptake transporters such as OATP2B1 and NTCP, or the upregulation of biliary excretion transporters in SHH with a prolonged incubation time.

In the present study, the C/M ratios and initial uptake clearances for the five tested compounds were higher in PHH than in SHH (Figs. 2 and 3, S1, and S2) Currently, it remains unknown whether PHH and SHH differ in the transporter expression levels. In recent years, targeted proteomics have been increasingly applied to quantify the transporter expression levels in human hepatocytes or liver specimens, but the resulting quantitative data displayed considerable variations, in part from the methodological heterogeneity (e.g., inter-laboratory variabilities including different sample processing methods, inter-lot differences and culturing conditions of hepatocytes). Recently, Kumar et al. quantified the levels of the major drug transporters in suspended, plated, and sandwich-cultured human hepatocytes derived from the same donors (n = 4). While the expression levels of OATP1Bs were relatively comparable between suspended and plated human hepatocytes derived from the same donor, the inter-individual variability was considerable. In the case of efflux transporters, their expression levels were comparable between suspended and plated human hepatocytes derived from the same donors, but much elevated in SCHH even from the same donors. Considering the data variability reported by Kumar et al. and other reports, the results may well be preliminary unless the expression levels of OATP1Bs are assessed using a sufficiently large number of hepatocyte lots. As part of ongoing investigations in our laboratories, quantitative targeted proteomics have been applied to measure the major drug transporters in multiple lots of cryopreserved hepatocytes (n = 7–10, prepared as PHH or SHH). Upon completion of our analysis, the resulting quantitative data will be compared between PHH and SHH and interpreted in conjunction with the previous results that assessed the transporter expression levels and the associated variability in multiple lots of human hepatocytes.

Our results indicated that PHH might be less prone to loss of the uptake ability upon prolonged incubation than SHH. Our current finding may also have relevance in the assessment of the Kp,uu values (commonly used to predict the unbound drug concentrations inside cells that contain the metabolizing enzymes, efflux transporters, and other molecular targets). Yoshikado et al. proposed a method that calculates the Kp,uu values using the steady-state C/M ratios at 37 °C and on ice. To ensure that the obtained C/M ratio represents the value at the steady-state (thereby, accurately predicting Kp,uu), it is important to understand the time courses of the C/M ratios and possible factors influencing the time-dependent changes in the uptake measurements. The current study mainly compared the time courses in the OATP1B-mediated uptake measurements between PHH and SHH. SCHH are certainly necessary to evaluate both sinusoidal uptake and biliary excretion clearances of drugs in vitro. For the measurement of the sinusoidal uptake clearance, the use of PHH or SHH is however common, in part by being less labor- and time-intensive than SCHH. The expression of biliary excretion transporters tends to be elevated in SCHH, to the level higher than the liver tissues from the same donors. Considering these noted differences from the literature and the current study, the use of PHH is recommended as a convenient tool to assess the sinusoidal drug uptake while maintaining the transporter functions, particularly for OATP1Bs. Depending on the substrates (and the involvement of other transporters, especially, on the canalicular membrane), the use of SCHH may be better suited for the Kp,uu determination.
